
abase v. lower; degrade; humiliate. Anna expected to have to curtsy to the King of Siam; when told to cast herself down on the ground before him, however, she refused to abase herself, abasement, N.
abash v. embarrass. He was not at all abashed by her open admiration.
abate   v. subside or moderate. Rather than leaving immediately, they waited for the storm to abate.
abbreviate v. shorten. Because we were running out of time, the lecturer had to abbreviate her speech.
abdicate v. renounce; give up. When Edward VIII abdicated British throne, he surprised the entire world.
aberrant   ADJ. abnormal or deviant. Given the aberrant nature of the data, we came to doubt the validity of the entire experiment.
aberration N. deviation from the expected or the normal; mental irregularity or disorder. Survivors of a major catastrophe are likely to exhibit aberrations of behavior because of the trauma they have experienced.
abet v. assist, usually in doing something wrong; encourage. She was unwilling to abet him in the swindle he had planned.
abeyance   N. suspended action. The deal was held in abeyance until her arrival.
abhor v. detest; hate. She abhorred all forms of bigotry, abhorrence, N.
abject ADJ. wretched; lacking pride. On the streets of New York the homeless live in abject poverty, huddling in doorways to find shelter from the wind.
abjure v. renounce upon oath. He abjured his allegiance to the king, abjuration, N.
ablution N. washing. His daily ablutions were accompanied by loud noises that he humorously labeled "Opera in the Bath."
abnegation N. renunciation; self-sacrifice. Though Rudolph and Duchess Flavia loved one another, their love was doomed, for she had to wed the king; their act of abnegation was necessary to preserve the kingdom.
abolish v. cancel; put an end to. The president of the college refused to abolish the physical education requirement, abolition, N.
abominable ADJ. detestable; extremely unpleasant; very bad. Mary liked John until she learned he was also dating Susan; then she called him an abominable young man, with abominable taste in women.
abominate v. loathe; hate. Moses scolded the idol worshippers in the tribe because he abominated the custom.
aboriginal ADJ., N. being the first of its kind in a region; primitive; native. Her studies of the primitive art forms of the aboriginal Indians were widely reported in the scientific journals, aborigine, N.
abortive ADJ. unsuccessful; fruitless. Attacked by armed troops, the Chinese students had to abandon their abortive attempt to democratize Beijing peacefully, abort, v.
abrasive ADJ. rubbing away; tending to grind down. Just as abrasive cleaning powders can wear away a shiny finish, abrasive remarks can wear away a listener's patience, abrade, v.
abridge v. condense or shorten. Because the publishers felt the public wanted a shorter version of War and Peace, they proceeded to abridge the novel.
abrogate v. abolish. The king intended to abrogate the decree issued by his predecessor.
abscission N. cutting off; separation. When a flower or leaf separates naturally from the parent plant, this process is called abscission.
abscond   v. depart secretly and hide. The teller who absconded with the bonds went uncaptured until some one recognized him from his photograph on America's Most Wanted.
absolute ADJ. complete; totally unlimited; certain. Although the King of Siam was an absolute monarch, he did not want to behead his unfaithful wife without absolute evidence of her infidelity.
absolve v. pardon (an offense), The father confessor absolved him of his sins, absolution, N.
abstain v. refrain; withhold from participation. After considering the effect of alcohol on his athletic performance, he decided to abstain from drinking while he trained for the race.
abstemious   ADJ.  sparing  in eating  and  drinking; temperate.  Concerned  whether  her vegetarian  son's abstemious diet provided him with sufficient protein, the worried mother pressed food on him.
abstinence N. restraint from eating or drinking. The doctor recommended total abstinence from salted foods, abstain, v.
abstract ADJ. theoretical; not concrete; nonrepresentational. To him, hunger was an abstract concept; he had never missed a meal.
abstruse ADJ. obscure; profound; difficult to understand. Baffled by the abstruse philosophical texts assigned in class, Dave asked Lexy to explain Kant's Critique of Pure Reason.
abusive ADJ. coarsely insulting; physically harmful. An abusive parent damages a child both mentally and physically.
abut v. border upon; adjoin. Where our estates abut, we must build a fence.
abysmal ADJ. bottomless. His arrogance is exceeded only by his abysmal ignorance.
abyss N. enormous chasm; vast, bottomless pit. Darth Vader seized the evil emperor and hurled him into the abyss.
academic ADJ. related to a school; not practical or directly useful. The dean's talk about reforming academic policies was only an academic discussion: we knew little, if anything, would change.
accede v. agree. If I accede to this demand for blackmail, I am afraid that I will be the victim of future demands.
accelerate v. move faster. In our science class, we learn how falling bodies accelerate.
accessible ADJ. easy to approach; obtainable. We asked our guide whether the ruins were accessible on foot.
accessory N. additional object; useful but not essential thing. She bought an attractive handbag as an accessory for her dress, also ADJ.
acclaim v. applaud; announce with great approval. The sportscasters acclaimed every American victory in the Olympics and decried every American defeat, acclamation, N.
acclimate v. adjust to climate or environment; adapt. One of the difficulties of our present air age is the need of travelers to acclimate themselves to their new and often strange environments.
acclivity N. sharp upslope of a hill. The car could not go up the acclivity in high gear.
accolade N. award of merit. In Hollywood, an "Oscar" is the highest accolade.
accommodate v. oblige or help someone; adjust or bring into harmony; adapt. Mitch always did everything possible to accommodate his elderly relatives, from driving them to medical appointments to helping them with paperwork, (secondary meaning)
accomplice N. partner in crime. Because he had provided the criminal with the lethal weapon, he was arrested as an accomplice in the murder.
accord N. agreement. She was in complete accord with the verdict.
accost v. approach and speak first to a person. When the two young men accosted me, I was frightened because I thought they were going to attack me.
accoutre v. equip. The fisherman was accoutered with the best that the sporting goods store could supply, accoutrement, N.
accretion N. growth; increase. Over the years Bob put on weight; because of this accretion of flesh, he went from size M to size XL. accrete, v.
accrue v. come about by addition. You must pay the interest that has accrued on your debt as well as the principal sum. accrual, N.
acerbity N. bitterness of speech and temper. The meeting of the United Nations Assembly was marked with such acerbity that observers held little hope of reaching any useful settlement of the problem, acerbic, ADJ.
acetic ADJ. vinegary. The salad had an exceedingly acetic flavor.
acidulous ADJ. slightly sour; sharp; caustic. James was unpopular because of his sarcastic and acidulous remarks.
acknowledge v. recognize; admit. Although I acknowledge that the Beatles' tunes sound pretty dated nowadays, I still prefer them to the gangster rap songs my brothers play.
acme N. peak; pinnacle; highest point. Welles's success in Citizen Kane marked the acme of his career as an actor; never again did he achieve such popular acclaim.
acoustics N. science of sound; quality that makes a room easy or hard to hear in. Carnegie Hall is liked by music lovers because of its fine acoustics.
acquiesce v. assent; agree passively. Although she appeared to acquiesce to her employer's suggestions, I could tell she had reservations about the changes he wanted made, acquiescence, N.; acquiescent, ADJ.
acquittal N. deliverance from a charge. His acquittal by the jury surprised those who had thought him guilty, acquit, v.
acrid ADJ. sharp; bitterly pungent. The acrid odor of burnt gunpowder filled the room after the pistol had been fired.
acrimonious ADJ. bitter in words or manner. The candidate attacked his opponent in highly acrimonious terms, acrimony, N.
acrophobia N. fear of heights. A born salesman, he could convince someone with a bad case of acrophobia to sign up for a life membership in a sky-diving club.
actuarial ADJ. calculating; pertaining to insurance statistics. According to recent actuarial tables, life expectancy is greater today than it was a century ago.
actuate v. motivate. I fail to understand what actuated you to reply to this letter so nastily.
acuity N. sharpness. In time his youthful acuity of vision failed him, and he needed glasses.
acumen N. mental keenness. Her business acumen helped her to succeed where others had failed.
acute ADJ. quickly perceptive; keen; brief and severe. The acute young doctor realized immediately that the gradual deterioration of her patient's once-acute hearing was due to a chronic illness, not an acute one.
adage N. wise saying; proverb. There is much truth in the old adage about fools and their money.
adamant ADJ. hard; inflexible. In this movie Branson played the part of a revenge-driven man, adamant in his determination to punish the criminals who destroyed his family, adamancy, N.
adapt v. alter; modify. Some species of animals have become extinct because they could not adapt to a changing environment.
ambrosia N. food of the gods. Ambrosia was supposed to give immortality to any human who ate it.
ambulatory ADJ. able to walk; not bedridden. Calvin was a highly ambulatory patient; not only did he refuse to be confined to bed, but also he insisted on riding his skateboard up and down the halls.
ameliorate v.  improve.  Many social workers have attempted to ameliorate the conditions of people living in the slums.
amenable ADJ. readily managed or willing to be led; answerable or accountable legally. Although the ambassador was usually amenable to friendly suggestions, he balked when we hinted he should pay his parking tickets. As a foreign diplomat, he claimed he was not amenable to minor local laws.
amend v. correct; change, generally for the better. Hoping to amend his condition, he left Vietnam for the United States.
amenities N. convenient features; courtesies. In addition to the customary amenities for the business traveler—fax machines, modems, a health club—the hotel offers the services of a butler versed in the social amenities.
amiable ADJ. agreeable; lovable; warmly friendly. In Little Women, Beth is the amiable daughter whose loving disposition endears her to all who know her.
amicable ADJ. politely friendly; not quarrelsome. Beth's sister Jo is the hot-tempered tomboy who has a hard time maintaining amicable relationships with those around her. Jo's quarrel with her friend Laurie finally reaches an amicable settlement, but not because Jo turns amiable overnight.
amiss ADJ. wrong; faulty. Seeing her frown, he wondered if anything were amiss, also ADV.
amity N. friendship. Student exchange programs such as the Experiment in International Living were established to promote international amity.
amnesia N. loss of memory. Because she was suffering from amnesia, the police could not get the young girl to identify herself.
amnesty N. pardon. When his first child was born, the king granted amnesty to all in prison.
amoral ADJ. lacking a moral sense.The amoral individual lacks a code of ethics; he cannot tell right from wrong. The immoral person can tell right from wrong; he chooses to do something he knows is wrong.
amorous ADJ. moved by sexual love; loving. "Love them and leave them" was the motto of the amorous Don Juan.
amorphous ADJ. formless; lacking shape or definition. As soon as we have decided on our itinerary, we shall send you a copy; right now, our plans are still amorphous.
amphibian ADJ. able to live both on land and in water. Frogs are classified as amphibian, also N. amphitheater   N. oval building with tiers of seats. The spectators in the amphitheater cheered the gladiators.
ample ADJ. abundant. Bond had ample opportunity to escape. Why, then, did he let us capture him?
amplify v. broaden or clarify by expanding; intensify; make stronger. Charlie Brown tried to amplify his remarks, but he was drowned out by jeers from the audience. Lucy was smarter: she used a loudspeaker to amplify her voice.
amputate v. cut off part of body; prune. When the doctors had to amputate Ted Kennedy's leg to prevent the spread of cancer, he did not let the loss of his leg keep him from participating in sports.
amok (also amuck) ADV. in a state of rage. The police had to be called in to restrain him after he ran amok in the department store.
amulet N. charm; talisman. Around her neck she wore the amulet that the witch doctor had given her.
anachronism N. something or someone misplaced in time. Shakespeare's reference to clocks in Julius Caesar is an anachronism; no clocks existed in Caesar's time. anachronistic, ADJ.
analgesic ADJ. causing insensitivity to pain. The analgesic qualities of this lotion will provide temporary relief.
analogous ADJ. comparable. She called our attention to the things that had been done in an analogous situation and recommended that we do the same.
analogy N. similarity; parallelism. A well-known analogy compares the body's immune system with an army whose defending troops are the lymphocytes or white blood cells.
anarchist N. person who seeks to overturn the established government; advocate of abolishing authority. Denying she was an anarchist, Katya maintained she wished only to make changes in our government, not to destroy it entirely.
anarchy   N. absence of governing body; state of disorder. The assassination of the leaders led to a period of anarchy.
anathema N. solemn curse; someone or something regarded as a curse. The Ayatolla Khomeini heaped anathema upon "the Great Satan," that is, the United States. To the Ayatolla, America and the West were anathema', he loathed the democratic nations, cursing them in his dying words, anathematize, v.
ancestry N. family descent. David can trace his ancestry as far back as the seventeenth century, when one of his ancestors was a court trumpeter somewhere in Germany, ancestral, ADJ.
anchor v. secure or fasten firmly; be fixed in place. We set the post in concrete to anchor it in place, anchorage, N.
ancillary ADJ. serving as an aid or accessory; auxiliary. In an ancillary capacity Doctor Watson was helpful; however, Holmes could not trust the good doctor to solve a perplexing case on his own. also N.
anecdote N. short account of an amusing or interesting event. Rather than make concrete proposals for welfare reform, President Reagan told anecdotes about poor people who became wealthy despite their impoverished backgrounds.
anemia N. condition in which blood lacks red corpuscles. The doctor ascribes her tiredness to anemia. anemic, ADJ.
anesthetic N. substance that removes sensation with or without loss of consciousness. His monotonous voice acted like an anesthetic; his audience was soon asleep, anesthesia, N.
anguish N. acute pain; extreme suffering. Visiting the site of the explosion, the president wept to see the anguish of the victims and their families.
angular ADJ. sharp-cornered; stiff in manner. Mr. Spock's features, though angular, were curiously attractive, in a Vulcan way.
animadversion N. critical remark. He resented the animadversions of his critics, particularly because he realized they were true.
animated ADJ. lively; spirited. Jim Carrey's facial expressions are highly animated: when he played Ace Ventura, he was practically rubber-faced.
animosity N. active enmity. He incurred the animosity of the ruling class because he advocated limitations of their power.
animus N. hostile feeling or intent. The animus of the speaker became obvious to all when he began to indulge in sarcastic and insulting remarks.
annals N. records; history. In the annals of this period, we find no mention of democratic movements.
anneal v. reduce brittleness and improve toughness by heating and cooling. After the glass is annealed, it will be less subject to chipping and cracking.
annex v. attach; take possession of. Mexico objected to the United States' attempts to annex the territory that later became the state of Texas.
annihilate v. destroy. The enemy in its revenge tried to annihilate the entire population.
annotate v. comment; make explanatory notes. In the appendix to the novel, the critic sought to annotate many of the more esoteric references.
annuity N. yearly allowance. The annuity she set up with the insurance company supplements her social security benefits so that she can live very comfortably without working.
annul v. make void. The parents of the eloped couple tried to annual the marriage.
anodyne N. drug that relieves pain; opiate. His pain was so great that no anodyne could relieve it.
anoint v. consecrate. The prophet Samuel anointed David with oil, crowning him king of Israel.
anomalous ADJ. abnormal; irregular. She was placed in the anomalous position of seeming to approve procedures that she despised.
anomaly N. irregularity. A bird that cannot fly is an anomaly.
anonymity N. state of being nameless; anonymousness. The donor of the gift asked the college not to mention her by name; the dean readily agreed to respect her anonymity, anonymous, ADJ.
antagonism N. hostility; active resistance. Barry showed his antagonism toward his new stepmother by ignoring her whenever she tried talking to him. antagonistic, ADJ.
antecede v. precede. The invention of the radiotelegraph anteceded the development of television by a quarter of a century.
antecedents N. preceding events or circumstances that influence what comes later; ancestors or early background. Susi Bechhofer's ignorance of her Jewish background had its antecedents in the chaos of World War II. Smuggled out of Germany and adopted by a Christian family, she knew nothing of her birth and antecedents until she was reunited with her Jewish family in 1989.
antediluvian ADJ. antiquated; extremely ancient. Looking at his great-aunt's antique furniture, which must have been cluttering up her attic since before Noah's flood, the young heir exclaimed, "Heavens! How positively antediluvian\"
anthem N. song of praise or patriotism. Let us now all join in singing the national anthem.
anthology N. book of literary selections by various authors. This anthology of science fiction was compiled by the late Isaac Asimov. anthologize, v.
anthropoid ADJ. manlike. The gorilla is the strongest of the anthropoid animals, also N.
anthropologist N. student of the history and science of humankind. Anthropologists have discovered several relics of prehistoric humans in this area.
anthropomorphic ADJ. having human form or characteristics. Primitive religions often have deities with anthropomorphic characteristics.
anticlimax N. letdown in thought or emotion. After the fine performance in the first act, the rest of the play was an anticlimax, anticlimactic, ADJ.
antidote N. remedy to counteract a poison or disease. When Marge's child accidentally swallowed some cleaning fluid, the local poison control hotline instructed Marge how to administer the antidote.
antipathy N. aversion; dislike. Tom's extreme antipathy for disputes keeps him from getting into arguments with his temperamental wife. Noise in any form is antipathetic to him. Among his other antipathies are honking cars, boom boxes, and heavy metal rock.
antiquated ADJ. obsolete; outdated. Accustomed to editing his papers on word processors, Philip thought typewriters, were too antiquated for him to use.
antiseptic N. substance that prevents infection. It is advisable to apply an antiseptic to any wound, no matter how slight or insignificant, also ADJ.
antithesis N. contrast; direct opposite of or to. This tyranny was the antithesis of all that he had hoped for, and he fought it with all his strength, antithetical or antithetic, ADJ.
anvil N. iron block used in hammering out metals. After heating the iron horseshoe in the forge, the blacksmith picked it up with his tongs and set it on the anvil.
apathy N. lack of caring; indifference. A firm believer in democratic government, she could not understand the apathy of people who never bothered to vote, apathetic, ADJ.
ape v. imitate or mimic. In the comedy Young Frankenstein, when the servant Igor limps off, saying, "Walk this way," the hero apes him, hobbling after Igor in an imitation of his walk.
aperture N. opening; hole. She discovered a small aperture in the wall, through which the insects had entered the room.
apex N. tip; summit; climax. At the apex of his career, the star received offers of leading roles daily; two years later, he was reduced to taking bit parts in B-movies.
aphasia N. loss of speech due to injury or illness. After the automobile accident, the victim had periods of aphasia when he could not speak at all or could only mumble incoherently.
aphorism N. pithy maxim or saying. An aphorism is usually philosophic or scientific, as compared to an adage, which is usually more homely and concrete. "Absolute power corrupts absolutely" is an aphorism. "You can lead a horse to water, but you can't make him drink" is an adage, aphoristic, ADJ.
apiary N. a place where bees are kept. Although he spent many hours daily in the apiary, he was very seldom stung by a bee.
aplomb N. poise; assurance. Gwen's aplomb in handling potentially embarrassing moments was legendary around the office; when one of her clients broke a piece of her best crystal, she coolly picked up her own goblet and hurled it into the fireplace.
apocalyptic ADJ. prophetic; pertaining to revelations. The crowd jeered at the street preacher's apocalyptic predictions of doom. The Apocalypse or Book of Heve/ations of Saint John prophesies the end of the world as we know it and foretells marvels and prodigies that signal the coming doom, apocalypse, N.
apocryphal ADJ. untrue; made up. To impress his friends, Tom invented apocryphal tales of his adventures in the big city.
apogee N. highest point. When the moon in its orbit is furthest away from the earth, it is at its apogee.
apolitical ADJ. having an aversion or lack of concern for political affairs. It was hard to remain apolitical during the Vietnam War; even people who generally ignored public issues felt they had to take political stands.
apologist N. one who writes in defense of a cause or institution. Rather than act as an apologist for the current regime in Beijing and defend its brutal actions, the young diplomat decided to defect to the West.
apostate N. one who abandons his religious faith or political beliefs. Because he switched from one party to another, his former friends shunned him as an apostate. apostasy, N.
apothecary N. druggist. In Holland, apothecaries still sell spices as well as ointments and pills.
apothegm N. pithy, compact saying. Proverbs are apothegms that have become familiar sayings.
apotheosis N. elevation to godhood; an ideal example of something. The apotheosis of a Roman emperor was designed to ensure his eternal greatness: people would worship at his altar forever. The hero of the novel Generation Xwas the apotheosis of a slacker, the quintessential example of a member of his generation.
appall v. dismay; shock. We were appalled by the horrifying conditions in the city's jails.
apparition N. ghost; phantom. On the castle battlements, an apparition materialized and spoke to Hamlet, warning him of his uncle's treachery. In Ghostbusters, hordes of apparitions materialized, only to be dematerialized by the specialized apparatus wielded by Bill Murray.
appease   v. pacify or soothe; relieve. Tom and Jody tried to appease the crying baby by offering him one toy after another. However, he would not calm down until they appeased his  hunger  by  giving  him  a  bottle, appeasement, N.
appellation N. name; title. Macbeth was startled when the witches greeted him with an incorrect appellation. Why did they call him Thane of Cawdor, he wondered, when the holder of that title still lived?
append v. attach. When you append a bibliography to a text, you have created an appendix.
application N. diligent attention. Pleased with how well Tom had whitewashed the fence, Aunt Polly praised him for his application, (secondary meaning) apply, v.
apposite ADJ. appropriate; fitting. She was always able to find the apposite phrase, the correct expression for every occasion.
appraise v. estimate value of. It is difficult to appraise old paintings; it is easier to call them priceless, appraisal, N.
appreciate v. be thankful for; increase in worth; be thoroughly conscious of. Little Orphan Annie truly appreciated the stocks Daddy Warbucks gave her, whose value appreciated considerably over the years.
apprehend v. arrest (a criminal); dread; perceive. The police will apprehend the culprit and convict him before long.
apprehensive ADJ. fearful; discerning. His apprehensive glances at the people who were walking in the street revealed
apprise   v. inform. When she was apprised of the dangerous weather conditions, she decided to postpone her trip.
approbation   N. approval. Wanting her parents' regard, she looked for some sign of their approbation.
appropriate   v. acquire; take possession of for one's own use. The ranch owners appropriated the lands that had originally been set aside for the Indians' use.
appurtenances N. subordinate possessions. He bought the estate and all its appurtenances.
apropos PREP, with reference to; regarding. I find your remarks apropos of the present situation timely and pertinent, also ADJ. and ADV.
aptitude N. fitness; talent. The counselor evaluated his aptitudes before advising him about the career he should follow.
aquiline ADJ. curved, hooked. He can be recognized by his aquiline nose, curved like the beak of the eagle.
arable ADJ. fit for growing crops. The first settlers wrote home glowing reports of the New World, praising its vast acres of arable land ready for the plow.
arbiter N. person with power to decide a matter in dispute; judge. As an arbiter in labor disputes, she has won the confidence of the workers and the employers.
arbitrary ADJ. unreasonable or capricious; tyrannical. The coach claimed the team lost because the umpire made some arbitrary calls.
arbitrate v. act as judge. She was called upon to arbitrate the dispute between the union and the management.
arboretum N. place where different varieties of trees and shrubs are studied and exhibited. Walking along the tree lined paths of the arboretum, Rita noted poplars, firs, and some particularly fine sycamores.
arcade N. a covered passageway, usually lined with shops. The arcade was popular with shoppers because it gave them protection from the summer sun and the winter rain.
arcane ADJ. secret; mysterious; known only to the initiated. Secret brotherhoods surround themselves with arcane rituals and trappings to mystify outsiders. So do doctors. Consider the arcane terminology they use and the impression they try to give that what is arcane to us is obvious to them.
archaeology N. study of artifacts and relics of early mankind. The professor of archaeology headed an expedition to the Gobi Desert in search of ancient ruins.
archaic ADJ. antiquated. "Methinks," "thee," and "thou" are archaic words that are no longer part of our normal vocabulary.
archetype N. prototype; primitive pattern. The Brooklyn Bridge was the archetype of the many spans that now connect Manhattan with Long Island and New Jersey.
archipelago N. group of closely located islands. When he looked at the map and saw the archipelagoes in the South Seas, he longed to visit them.
archives N. public records; place where public records are kept. These documents should be part of the archives so that historians may be able to evaluate them in the future.
ardor N. heat; passion; zeal. Katya's ardor was contagious; soon all her fellow demonstrators were busily making posters and handing out flyers, inspired by her ardent enthusiasm for the cause, ardent, ADJ.
arduous ADJ. hard; strenuous. Her arduous efforts had sapped her energy.
argot N. slang. In the argot of the underworld, she "was taken for a ride."
aria N. operatic solo. At her Metropolitan Opera audition, Marian Anderson sang an aria from Norma.
arid ADJ. dry; barren. The cactus has adapted to survive in an arid environment.
aristocracy N. hereditary nobility; privileged class. Americans have mixed feelings about hereditary aristocracy, we say all men are created equal, but we describe particularly outstanding people as natural aristocrats.
armada N. fleet of warships. Queen Elizabeth's navy was able to defeat the mighty armada that threatened the English coast.
aromatic ADJ. fragrant. Medieval sailing vessels brought aromatic herbs from China to Europe.
arraign v. charge in court; indict. After his indictment by the Grand Jury, the accused man was arraigned in the County Criminal Court.
array v. marshal; draw up in order. His actions were bound to array public sentiment against him. also N.
array v. clothe; adorn. She liked to watch her mother array herself in her finest clothes before going out for the evening, also N.
arrears N. being in debt. He was in arrears with his payments on the car.
arrhythmic ADJ. lacking rhythm or regularity. The doctors feared his arrhythmic heartbeat might be the first symptom of an imminent heart attack, arrhythmia, N.
arrogance N. pride; haughtiness. Convinced that Emma thought she was better than anyone else in the class, Ed rebuked her for her arrogance.
arroyo N. gully. Until the heavy rains of the past spring, this arroyo had been a dry bed.
arsenal N. storage place for military equipment. People are forbidden to smoke in the arsenal lest a stray spark set off the munitions stored there.
articulate ADJ. effective; distinct. Her articulate presentation of the advertising campaign impressed her employers, also v.
artifact N. object made by human beings, either handmade or mass-produced. Archaeologists debated the significance of. the artifacts discovered in the ruins of Asia Minor but came to no conclusion about the culture they represented.
artifice N. deception; trickery. The Trojan War proved to the Greeks that cunning and artifice were often more effective than military might.
artisan N. a manually skilled worker. Artists and artisans alike are necessary to the development of a culture.
artless ADJ. without guile; open and honest. Red Riding Hood's artless comment, "Grandma, what big eyes you have!" indicates the child's innocent surprise at her "grandmother's" changed appearance.
ascendancy N. controlling influence. President Marcos failed to maintain his ascendancy over the Philippines.
ascertain v. find out for certain. Please ascertain her present address.
ascetic ADJ.   practicing  self-denial;   austere.  The wealthy, self-indulgent young man felt oddly drawn to the strict, ascetic life led by members of some monastic orders, also N. asceticism, N.
ascribe v. refer; attribute; assign. I can ascribe no motive for her acts.
aseptic ADJ. preventing infection; having a cleansing effect. Hospitals succeeded in lowering the mortality rate as soon as they introduced aseptic conditions.
ashen ADJ. ash-colored; deadly pale. Her face was ashen with fear.
asinine ADJ. stupid. Your asinine remarks prove that you have not given this problem any serious consideration.
askance ADV. with a sideways or indirect look. Looking askance at her questioner, she displayed her scorn.
askew ADV. crookedly; slanted; at an angle. When the clown placed his hat askew upon his head, the children in the audience laughed.
asperity N. sharpness (of temper). These remarks, spoken with asperity, stung the boys to whom they had been directed.
aspersion N. slanderous remark. Do not cast aspersions on her character.
aspirant N. seeker after position or status. Although I am an asp/rant for public office, I am not willing to accept the dictates of the party bosses, also ADJ.
aspire v. seek to attain; long for. Because he aspired to a career in professional sports, Philip enrolled in a graduate program in sports management, aspiration, N.
assail v. assault. He was assailed with questions after his lecture.
assay v. analyze; evaluate. When they assayed the ore, they found that they had discovered a very rich vein, also N.
assent v. agree; accept. It gives me great pleasure to assent to your request, also N.
assert v. state strongly or positively; insist on or demand recognition of (rights, claims, etc.). When Jill asserted that nobody else in the junior class had such an early curfew, her parents asserted themselves, telling her that if she didn't get home by nine o'clock she would be grounded for the week, assertion, N.
assessment N. estimation; appraisal. I would like to have your assessment of the situation in South Africa.
assiduous ADJ. diligent. It took Rembrandt weeks of assiduous labor before he was satisfied with his portrait of his son.
assimilate v. absorb; cause to become homogenous. The manner in which the United States was able to assimilate the hordes of immigrants during the nineteenth and early part of the twentieth centuries will always be a source of pride.
assuage v. ease or lessen (pain); satisfy (hunger); soothe (anger). Jilted by Jane, Dick tried to assuage his heartache by indulging in ice cream. One gallon later,  he had assuaged his appetite but not his grief, assuagement, N.
assumption N. something taken for granted; the taking over or taking possession of. The young princess made the foolish assumption that the regent would not object to her assumption of power, assume, v.
assurance N. promise or pledge; certainty; self-confidence. When Guthrie gave Guinness his assurance that rehearsals were going well, he spoke with such assurance that Guinness was convinced, assure, v. assured, ADJ.
asteroid N. small planet. Asteroids have become commonplace to the readers of interstellar travel stories in science fiction magazines.
astigmatism N. eye defect that prevents proper focus. As soon as his parents discovered that the boy suffered from astigmatism, they took him to the optometrist for corrective glasses
astral ADJ. relating to the stars. She was amazed at the number of astral bodies the new telescope revealed.
astringent ADJ. binding; causing contraction; harsh or severe. The astringent quality of the unsweetened lemon juice made swallowing difficult, also N.
astronomical ADJ. enormously large or extensive. The government seemed willing to spend astronomical sums on weapons development.
astute ADJ. wise; shrewd; keen. The painter was an astute observer, noticing every tiny detail of her model's appearance and knowing exactly how important each one was.
asunder ADV. into parts; apart. A fierce quarrel split the partnership asunder; the two partners finally sundered their connections because their points of view were poles asunder.
asylum N. place of refuge or shelter; protection. The refugees sought asylum from religious persecution in a new land.
asymmetric ADJ. not identical on both sides of a dividing central line. Because one eyebrow was set markedly higher than the other, William's face had a particularly asymmetric appearance, asymmetry, N.
atavism N. resemblance to remote ancestors rather than to parents; reversion to an earlier type; throwback. In his love for gardening, Martin seemed an atavism to his Tuscan ancestors who lavished great care on their small plots of soil, atavistic, ADJ.
atheistic ADJ. denying the existence of God. His atheistic remarks shocked the religious worshippers.
atone v. make amends for; pay for. He knew no way in which he could atone tor his brutal crime.
atrocity N. brutal deed. In time of war, many atrocities are committed by invading armies.
atrophy N. wasting away. Polio victims need physiotherapy to prevent the atrophy of affected limbs, also v.
attentive ADJ. alert and watchful; considerate; thoughtful. Spellbound, the attentive audience watched the final game of the tennis match, never taking their eyes from the ball. A cold wind sprang up; Stan's attentive daughter slipped a sweater over his shoulders without distracting his attention from the game.
attenuate v. make thin; weaken. By withdrawing their forces, the generals hoped to attenuate the enemy lines.
attest v. testify; bear witness. Having served as a member of a grand jury, I can attest that our system of indicting individuals is in need of improvement.
attribute N. essential quality. His outstanding attribute was his kindness.
attribute v. ascribe; explain. I attribute her success in science to the encouragement she received from her parents.
attrition N. gradual decrease in numbers; reduction in the work force without firing employees; wearing away of opposition by means of harassment. In the 1960s urban churches suffered from attrition as members moved from the cities to the suburbs. Rather than fire staff members, church leaders followed a policy of attrition, allowing elderly workers to retire without replacing them.
atypical ADJ. not normal. The child psychiatrist reassured Mrs. Keaton that playing doctor was not atypical behavior for a child of young Alex's age. "Perhaps not," she replied, "but charging for house calls is!"
audacious   ADJ. daring; bold. Audiences cheered as Luke Skywalker and Princess Leia made their audacious, death-defying  leap to  freedom  and  escaped   Darth Vader's troops, audacity, N.
audit N. examination of accounts. When the bank examiners arrived to hold their annual audit, they discovered the embezzlements of the chief cashier, also v.
augment v. increase; add to. Armies augment their forces by calling up reinforcements; teachers augment their salaries by taking odd jobs.
augury N. omen; prophecy. He interpreted the departure of the birds as an augury of evil, augur, v.
august ADJ. impressive; majestic. Visiting the palace at Versailles, she was impressed by the august surroundings in which she found herself.
aureole N. sun's corona; halo. Many medieval paintings depict saintly characters with aureoles around their heads.
aurora ADJ. pertaining to the aurora borealis. The aurora/display was particularly spectacular that evening.
auspicious ADJ. favoring success. With favorable weather conditions, it was an auspicious moment to set sail. Thomas, however, had doubts about sailing: a paranoid, he became suspicious whenever conditions seemed auspicious.
austere   ADJ. forbiddingly stern; severely simple and unornamented.  The  headmaster's  austere demeanor tended to scare off the more timid students, who never visited his study willingly. The room reflected the man, austere and bare, like a monk's cell, with no touches of luxury to moderate its austerity.
authenticate v. prove genuine. An expert was needed to authenticate the original Van Gogh painting, distinguishing it from its imitation.
authoritarian ADJ. subordinating the individual to the state; completely dominating another's will. The leaders of the authoritarian regime ordered the suppression of the democratic protest movement. After years of submitting to the will of her authoritarian father, Elizabeth Barrett ran away from home with the poet Robert Browning.
authoritative ADJ. having the weight of authority; peremptory and dictatorial. Impressed by the young researcher's well-documented presentation, we accepted her analysis of the experiment as authoritative.
autocratic ADJ. having absolute, unchecked power; dictatorial. A person accustomed to exercising authority may become autocratic if his or her power is unchecked. Dictators by definition are autocrats. Bosses who dictate behavior as well as letters can be autocrats too. autocracy, N.
automaton N. mechanism that imitates actions of humans. Long before science fiction readers became aware of robots, writers were creating stories of automatons who could outperform humans.
autonomous ADJ.   self-governing.   Although   the University of California at Berkeley is just one part of the state university system, in many ways Cal Berkeley is autonomous, for it runs several programs that are not subject to outside control, autonomy, N.
autopsy N. examination of a dead body; postmortem. The medical examiner ordered an autopsy to determine the cause of death, also v.
auxiliary ADJ. offering or providing help; additional or subsidiary. To prepare for the emergency, they built an auxiliary power station, also N.
avalanche N. great mass of falling snow and ice. The park ranger warned the skiers to stay on the main trails, where they would be in no danger of being buried beneath a sudden avalanche.
avarice N. greediness for wealth. King Midas is a perfect example of avarice; he was so greedy that he wished everything he touched would turn to gold.
avenge v. take vengeance for something (or on behalf of someone). Hamlet vowed he would avenge his father's murder and punish Claudius for his horrible crime.
aver v. state confidently. I wish to aver that I am certain of success.
averse ADJ. reluctant; disinclined. The reporter was averse to revealing the sources of his information.
aversion N. firm dislike. Bert had an aversion to yuppies; Alex had an aversion to punks. Their mutual aversion was so great that they refused to speak to one another.
avert v. prevent; turn away. She averted her eyes from the dead cat on the highway.
aviary N. enclosure for birds. The aviary at the zoo held nearly 300 birds.
avid ADJ. greedy; eager for. He was avid for learning and read everything he could get. avidity, N.
avocation N. secondary or minor occupation. His hobby proved to be so fascinating and profitable that gradually he abandoned his regular occupation and concentrated on his avocation.
avow v. declare openly. Lana avowed that she never meant to steal Debbie's boyfriend, but no one believed her avowal of innocence.
avuncular ADJ. like an uncle. Avuncular pride did not prevent him from noticing his nephew's shortcomings.
awe N. solemn wonder. The tourists gazed with awe at the tremendous expanse of the Grand Canyon.
awl N. pointed tool used for piercing. She used an awl to punch additional holes in the leather belt she had bought,
awry ADV. distorted; crooked. He held his head awry, giving the impression that he had caught cold in his neck during the night, also ADJ.
axiom N. self-evident truth requiring no proof. Before a student can begin to think along the lines of Euclidean geometry, he must accept certain principles or axioms. axiomatic, ADJ.
azure ADJ. sky blue. Azure skies are indicative of good weather.

