babble v. chatter idly. The little girl babbled about her doll, also N.
bacchanalian ADJ. drunken. Emperor Nero attended the bacchanalian orgy.
badger v. pester; annoy. She was forced to change her telephone number because she was badgered by obscene phone calls.
badinage N. teasing conversation. Her friends at work greeted the news of her engagement with cheerful badinage.
baffle v. frustrate; perplex. The new code baffled the enemy agents.
bait v. harass; tease. The school bully bait the smaller children, terrorizing them.
baleful ADJ. deadly; having a malign influence; ominous. The fortune teller made baleful predictions of terrible things to come.
balk v. stop short, as if faced with an obstacle, and refuse to continue. The chief of police balked at sending his officers into the riot-torn area.
balk v. foil. When the warden learned that several inmates were planning to escape, he took steps to balk their attempt.
ballast N. heavy substance used to add stability or weight. The ship was listing badly to one side; it was necessary to shift the ballast in the hold to get her back on an even keel, also v.
balm N. something that relieves pain. Friendship is the finest balm for the pangs of disappointed love.
balmy ADJ. mild; fragrant. A balmy breeze refreshed us after the sultry blast.
banal ADJ. hackneyed; commonplace; trite; lacking originality. The hack writer's worn-out cliches made his comic sketch seem banal. He even resorted to the banality of having someone slip on a banana peel!
bandy v. discuss lightly or glibly; exchange (words) heatedly. While the president was happy to bandy patriotic generalizations with anyone who would listen to him, he refused to bandy words with unfriendly reporters at the press conference.
bane N. cause of ruin; curse. Lucy's little brother was the bane of her existence: his attempts to make her life miserable worked so well that she could have poisoned him with rats bane for having such a baneful effect.
bantering ADJ. good-naturedly ridiculing. They resented his bantering remarks because they misinterpreted his teasing as sarcasm.
barb N. sharp projection from fishhook or other object; openly cutting remark. If you were a politician, which would you prefer, being caught on the barb of a fishhook or being subjected to malicious verbal barbs? Who can blame the president if he's happier fishing than he is listening to his critics' barbed remarks?
bard N. poet. The ancient bard Homer sang of the fall of Troy.
barefaced ADJ. shameless; bold; unconcealed. Shocked by Huck Finn's barefaced lies, Miss Watson prayed the good Lord would give him a sense of his unregenerate wickedness.
baroque ADJ. highly ornate. Accustomed to the severe, angular lines of modern skyscrapers, they found the flamboyance of baroque architecture amusing.
barrage N. barrier laid down by artillery fire; overwhelming profusion. The company was forced to retreat through the barrage of heavy cannons.
barrister N. counselor-at-law. Galsworthy started as a barrister, but, when he found the practice of law boring, turned to writing.
barterer N. trader. The barterer exchanged trinkets for the natives' furs.
bask v. luxuriate; take pleasure in warmth. Basking on the beach, she relaxed so completely that she fell asleep.
bastion N. stronghold; something seen as a source of protection. The villagers fortified the town hall, hoping this improvised bastion could protect them from the guerrilla raids.
bate v. let down; restrain. Until it was time to open the presents, the children had to bate their curiosity, bated, ADJ.
bauble N. trinket; trifle. The child was delighted with the bauble she had won in the grab bag.
bawdy ADJ. indecent; obscene. Jack took offense at Jill's bawdy remarks. What kind of young man did she think he was?
beatific ADJ. giving bliss; blissful. The beatific smile on the child's face made us very happy.
beatitude N. blessedness; state of bliss. Growing closer to God each day, the mystic achieved a state of indescribable beatitude.
bedizen v. dress with vulgar finery. The witch doctors were bedizened in their gaudiest costumes.
bedraggle v. wet thoroughly. We were so bedraggled by the severe storm that we had to change into dry clothing, bedraggled, ADJ.
beeline N. direct, quick route. As soon as the movie was over, Jim made a beeline for the exit.
befuddle v. confuse thoroughly. His attempts to clarify the situation succeeded only in befuddling her further.
beget v. father; produce; give rise to. One good turn may deserve another; it does not necessarily beget another.
begrudge v. resent. I begrudge every minute I have to spend attending meetings.
beguile v. mislead or delude; cheat; pass time. With flattery and big talk of easy money, the con men beguiled Kyle into betting his allowance on the shell game. The men quickly beguiled poor Kyle of his money. Broke, he beguiled himself during the long hours by playing solitaire.
behemoth N. huge creature; something of monstrous size or power. Sportscasters nicknamed the linebacker "The Behemoth."
beholden ADJ. obligated; indebted. Since I do not wish to be beholden to anyone, I cannot accept this favor.
behoove v. be suited to; be incumbent upon. In this time of crisis, it behooves all of us to remain calm and await the instructions of our superiors.
belabor v. explain or go over excessively or to a ridiculous degree; assail verbally. The debate coach warned her student not to bore the audience by belaboring his point.
belated ADJ. delayed. He apologized for his belated note of condolence to the widow of his friend and explained that he had just learned of her husband's untimely death.
beleaguer v. besiege or attack; harass. The babysitter was surrounded by a crowd of unmanageable brats who relentlessly beleaguered her,
belie v.  contradict;  give  a false  impression.   His coarse, hard-bitten exterior belied his innate sensitivity.
belittle v. disparage; deprecate. Parents should not belittle their children's early attempts at drawing, but should encourage their efforts.
bellicose ADJ. warlike. His bellicose disposition alienated his friends, bellicosity, N.
belligerent ADJ. quarrelsome. Whenever he had too much to drink, he became belligerent and tried to pick fights with strangers, belligerence, N.
bemoan v. lament; express disapproval of. The widow bemoaned the death of her beloved husband. Although critics bemoaned the serious flaws in the author's novels, each year his latest book topped the best-seller list.
bemused ADJ. confused; lost in thought; preoccupied. Jill studied the garbled instructions with a bemused look on her face.
benediction N. blessing. The appearance of the sun after the many rainy days was like a benediction.
benefactor N. gift giver; patron. Scrooge later became Tiny Tim's benefactor and gave him gifts.
beneficent ADJ. kindly; doing good. The overgenerous philanthropist had to curb his beneficent impulses before he gave away all his money and left himself with nothing.
beneficial ADJ. helpful; useful. Tiny Tim's cheerful good nature had a beneficial influence on Scrooge's once-uncharitable disposition.
beneficiary N. person entitled to benefits or proceeds of an insurance policy or will. In Scrooge's will, he made Tiny Tim his beneficiary, everything he left would go to young Tim.
benevolent ADJ. generous; charitable. Mr. Fezziwig was a benevolent employer who wished to make Christmas merrier for young Scrooge and his other employees, benevolence, N.
benign ADJ. kindly; favorable; not malignant. Though her benign smile and gentle bearing made Miss Maple seem a sweet little old lady, in reality she was a tough-minded, shrewd observer of human nature, benignity, N.
benison N. blessing. Let us pray that the benison of peace once more shall prevail among the nations of the world.
bent ADJ.; N. determined; natural talent or inclination. Bent on advancing in the business world, the secretary-heroine of Working Girl had a true bent for high finance.
bequeath v. leave to someone by means of a will; hand down. In his will, Father bequeathed his watch to Philip; the bequest meant a great deal to the boy. bequest, N.
berate v. scold strongly. He feared she would berate him for his forgetfulness.
bereavement N. state of being deprived of something valuable or beloved. His friends gathered to console him upon his sudden bereavement.
bereft ADJ. deprived of; lacking. The foolish gambler soon found himself bereft of funds.
berserk ADV. frenzied. Angered, he went berserk and began to wreck the room.
beseech v. beg; plead with. The workaholic executive's wife beseeched him to spend more time with their son.
beset v. harass or trouble; hem in. Many vexing problems beset the American public school system. Sleeping Beauty's castle was beset on all sides by dense thickets that hid it from view.
besiege v. surround with armed forces; harass (with requests). When the bandits besieged the village, the villagers holed up in the town hall and prepared to withstand a long siege. Members of the new administration were besieged with job applications from people who had worked on the campaign.
besmirch v. soil, defile. The scandalous remarks in the newspaper besmirch the reputations of every member of the society.
bestial ADJ. beastlike; brutal; inhuman. According to legend, the werewolf was able to abandon its human shape and assume a bestial iron. The Red Cross sought to put an end to the bestial treatment of prisoners of war.
bestow v. confer. He wished to bestow great honors upon the hero.
betoken v. signify; indicate. The well-equipped docks, tall piles of cargo containers, and numerous vessels being loaded all betoken Oakland's importance as a port.
betray v. be unfaithful; reveal (unconsciously or unwillingly). The spy betrayed his country by selling military secrets to the enemy. When he was taken in for questioning, the tightness of his lips betrayed his fear of incriminating himself, betrayal, N.
betroth v. become engaged to marry. The announcement that they had become betrothed surprised their friends who had not suspected any romance, betrothal, N.
bevy N. large group. The movie actor was surrounded by a bevy of starlets.
bicameral ADJ. two-chambered, as a legislative body. The United States Congress is a bicameral body.
bicker v. quarrel. The children bickered morning, noon and night, exasperating their parents.
biennial ADJ. every two years. Seeing no need to meet more frequently, the group held biennial meetings instead of annual ones. Plants that bear flowers biennially are known as biennials.
bifurcated ADJ. divided into two branches; forked. With a bifurcated branch and a piece of elastic rubber, he made a crude but effective slingshot.
bigotry N. stubborn intolerance. Brought up in a democratic atmosphere, the student was shocked by the bigotry and narrowness expressed by several of his classmates.
bilious ADJ. suffering from indigestion; irritable. His bilious temperament was apparent to all who heard him rant about his difficulties.
bilk v. swindle; cheat. The con man specialized in bilking insurance companies.
billowing ADJ. swelling out in waves; surging. Standing over the air vent, Marilyn Monroe tried vainly to control her billowing skirts.
bivouac N. temporary encampment. While in bivouac, we spent the night in our sleeping bags under the stars, also v.
bizarre ADJ. fantastic; violently contrasting. The plot of the novel was too bizarre to be believed.
blanch v. bleach; whiten. Although age had blanched his hair, he was still vigorous and energetic.
bland ADJ. soothing or mild; agreeable. Jill tried a bland ointment for her sunburn. However, when Jack absent-mindedly patted her on the sunburned shoulder, she couldn't maintain her bland persona, blandness, N.
blandishment N. flattery. Despite the salesperson's blandishments, the customer did not buy the outfit.
blare N. loud, harsh roar or screech; dazzling blaze of light. I don't know which is worse: the steady blare of a boom box deafening your ears or a sudden blare of flashbulbs dazzling your eyes, also v.
blase ADJ. bored with pleasure or dissipation. Although Beth was as thrilled with the idea of a trip to Paris as her classmates were, she tried to act supercool and blaze, as if she'd been abroad hundreds of times.
blasphemy N. irreverence; sacrilege; cursing. In my father's house, the Dodgers were the holiest of holies; to cheer for another team was to utter words of blasphemy. blasphemous, ADJ.
blatant ADJ. extremely obvious; loudly offensive. Caught in a blatant lie, the scoundrel had only one regret: he wished that he had lied more subtly, blatancy, N.
bleak ADJ. cold or cheerless; unlikely to be favorable. The frigid, inhospitable Aleutian Islands are bleak military outposts. It's no wonder that soldiers assigned there have a bleak attitude toward their posting.
bard N. poet. The ancient bard Homer sang of the fall of Troy.
barefaced ADJ. shameless; bold; unconcealed. Shocked by Huck Finn's barefaced lies, Miss Watson prayed the good Lord would give him a sense of his unregenerate wickedness.
baroque ADJ. highly ornate. Accustomed to the severe, angular lines of modern skyscrapers, they found the flamboyance of baroque architecture amusing.
barrage N. barrier laid down by artillery fire; overwhelming profusion. The company was forced to retreat through the barrage of heavy cannons.
barrister N. counselor-at-law. Galsworthy started as a barrister, but, when he found the practice of law boring, turned to writing.
barterer N. trader. The barterer exchanged trinkets for the natives' furs.
bask v. luxuriate; take pleasure in warmth. Basking on the beach, she relaxed so completely that she fell asleep.
bastion N. stronghold; something seen as a source of protection. The villagers fortified the town hall, hoping this improvised bastion could protect them from the guerrilla raids.
bate v. let down; restrain. Until it was time to open the presents, the children had to bate their curiosity, bated, ADJ.
bauble N. trinket; trifle. The child was delighted with the bauble she had won in the grab bag.
bawdy ADJ. indecent; obscene. Jack took offense at Jill's bawdy remarks. What kind of young man did she think he was?
beatific ADJ. giving bliss; blissful. The beatific smile on the child's face made us very happy.
beatitude N. blessedness; state of bliss. Growing closer to God each day, the mystic achieved a state of indescribable beatitude.
bedizen v. dress with vulgar finery. The witch doctors were bedizened in their gaudiest costumes.
bedraggle v. wet thoroughly. We were so bedraggled by the severe storm that we had to change into dry clothing, bedraggled, ADJ.
beeline N. direct, quick route. As soon as the movie was over, Jim made a beeline for the exit.
befuddle v. confuse thoroughly. His attempts to clarify the situation succeeded only in befuddling her further.
beget v. father; produce; give rise to. One good turn may deserve another; it does not necessarily beget another.
begrudge v. resent. I begrudge every minute I have to spend attending meetings.
beguile v. mislead or delude; cheat; pass time. With flattery and big talk of easy money, the con men beguiled Kyle into betting his allowance on the shell game. The men quickly beguiled poor Kyle of his money. Broke, he beguiled himself during the long hours by playing solitaire.
behemoth N. huge creature; something of monstrous size or power. Sportscasters nicknamed the linebacker "The Behemoth."
beholden ADJ. obligated; indebted. Since I do not wish to be beholden to anyone, I cannot accept this favor.
behoove v. be suited to; be incumbent upon. In this time of crisis, it behooves all of us to remain calm and await the instructions of our superiors, belabor v. explain or go over excessively or to a ridiculous degree; assail verbally. The debate coach warned her student not to bore the audience by belaboring his point.
belated ADJ. delayed. He apologized for his belated note of condolence to the widow of his friend and explained that he had just learned of her husband's untimely death.
beleaguer v. besiege or attack; harass. The babysitter was surrounded by a crowd of unmanageable brats who relentlessly beleaguered her.
belie   v.  contradict;  give  a false  impression.  His coarse, hard-bitten exterior belied his innate sensitivity.
belittle v. disparage; deprecate. Parents should not belittle their children's early attempts at drawing, but should encourage their efforts.
bellicose ADJ. warlike. His bellicose disposition alienated his friends, bellicosity, N.
belligerent ADJ. quarrelsome. Whenever he had too much to drink, he became belligerent and tried to pick fights with strangers, belligerence, N.
bemoan v. lament; express disapproval of. The widow bemoaned the death of her beloved husband. Although critics bemoaned the serious flaws in the author's novels, each year his latest book topped the best-seller list.
bemused ADJ. confused; lost in thought; preoccupied. Jill studied the garbled instructions with a bemused look on her face.
benediction N. blessing. The appearance of the sun after the many rainy days was like a benediction.
benefactor N. gift giver; patron. Scrooge later became Tiny Tim's benefactor and gave him gifts.
beneficent   ADJ. kindly; doing good. The overgenerous philanthropist had to curb his beneficent impulses before he gave away all his money and left himself with nothing.
beneficial ADJ. helpful; useful. Tiny Tim's cheerful good nature had a beneficial influence on Scrooge's once-uncharitable disposition.
beneficiary N. person entitled to benefits or proceeds of an insurance policy or will. In Scrooge's will, he made Tiny Tim his beneficiary, everything he left would go to young Tim.
benevolent ADJ. generous; charitable. Mr. Fezziwig was a benevolent employer who wished to make Christmas merrier for young Scrooge and his other employees, benevolence, N.
blighted ADJ. suffering from a disease; destroyed. The extent of the blighted areas could be seen only when viewed from the air.
blithe ADJ. gay; joyous. Shelley called the skylark a "blithe spirit" because of its happy song.
bloated ADJ. swollen or puffed as with water or air. Her bloated stomach came from drinking so much water.
blowhard N. talkative boaster. After all Sol's talk about his big show business connections led nowhere, Sally decided he was just another blowhard.
bludgeon N. club; heavy-headed weapon. Attacked by Dr. Moriarty, Holmes used his walking stick as a bludgeon to defend himself. "Watson," he said. "I fear I may have bludgeoned Moriarty to death."
bluff ADJ. rough but good-natured. Jack had a bluff and hearty manner that belied his actual sensitivity; he never let people know how thin-skinned he really was.
bluff N. pretense (of strength); deception; high cliff. Claire thought Lord Byron's boast that he would swim the Hellespont was just a bluff; she was astounded when he dove from the high bluff into the waters below.
blunder N. error. The criminal's fatal blunder led to his capture, also v.
blurt v. utter impulsively. Before she could stop him, he blurted out the news.
bluster v. blow in heavy gusts; threaten emptily; bully. "Let the stormy winds bluster," cried Jack, "we'll set sail tonight." Jill let Jack bluster, she wasn't going anywhere, no matter what he said, also N.
bode v. foreshadow; portend. The gloomy skies and the sulfurous odors from the mineral springs seemed to bode evil to those who settled in the area.
bogus ADJ. counterfeit; not authentic. The police quickly found the distributors of the bogus twenty-dollar bills.
bohemian ADJ. unconventional (in an artistic way). Gertrude Stein ran off to Paris to live an eccentric, bohemian life with her writer friends. Oakland was not bohemian: it was too bourgeois, too middle-class.
boisterous ADJ. violent; rough; noisy. The unruly crowd became even more boisterous when he tried to quiet them.
bolster v. support; reinforce. The debaters amassed file boxes full of evidence to bolster their arguments.
bolt N. door bar; fastening pin or screw; length of fabric. The carpenter shut the workshop door, sliding the heavy metal bolt into place. He sorted through his toolbox for the nuts and bolts and nails required for the job. Before he cut into the bolt of canvas, he measured how much fabric he would need.
bolt v. dash or dart off; fasten (a door); gobble down. Jack was set to bolt out the front door, but Jill bolted the door. "Eat your breakfast," she said, "don't bolt your food."
bombardment N. attack (as with missiles). The enemy bombardment demolished the town. Members of the opposition party bombarded the prime minister with questions about the enemy attack.
bombastic   ADJ.  pompous;  using inflated  language. Puffed  up with  conceit,  the orator spoke  in  such  a bombastic manner that  we   longed  to  deflate  him. bombast, N.
boon N. blessing; benefit. The recent rains that filled our empty reservoirs were a boon to the whole community. boorish   ADJ.   rude;   insensitive.  Though  Mr.   Potts constantly interrupted his wife, she ignored his boorish behavior, for she had lost hope of teaching him courtesy.
bouillon N. clear beef soup. The cup of bouillon served by the stewards was welcomed by those who had been chilled by the cold ocean breezes.
bountiful ADJ. abundant; graciously generous. Thanks to the good harvest, we had a bountiful supply of food and we could be as bountiful as we liked in distributing food to the needy.
bourgeois ADJ. middle class; selfishly materialistic; dully conventional. Technically, anyone who belongs to the middle class is bourgeois, but, given the word's connotations, most people resent it if you call them that.
bovine ADJ. cow like; placid and dull. Nothing excites Esther; even when she won the state lottery, she still preserved her air of bovine calm.
bowdlerize v. expurgate. After the film editors had bowdlerized the language in the script, the motion picture's rating was changed from "R" to "PG."
boycott v. refrain from buying or using. To put pressure on grape growers to stop using pesticides that harmed the farm workers' health, Cesar Chavez called for consumers to boycott grapes, also N.
brackish ADJ. somewhat saline. He found the only wells in the area were brackish; drinking the water made him nauseous.
braggadocio N. boasting. He was disliked because his manner was always full of braggadocio.
braggart N. boaster. Modest by nature, she was no braggart, preferring to let her accomplishments speak for themselves.
brandish v. wave around; flourish. Alarmed, Doctor Watson wildly brandished his gun until Holmes told him to put the thing away before he shot himself.
bravado N. swagger; assumed air of defiance. The bravado of the young criminal disappeared when he was confronted by the victims of his brutal attack.
brawn N. muscular strength; sturdiness. It takes brawn to become a champion weight-lifter, brawny, ADJ.
brazen ADJ. insolent. Her brazen contempt for authority angered the officials.
breach N. breaking of contract or duty; fissure or gap. Jill sued Jack for breach of promise, claiming he had broken their engagement. The attackers found a breach in the enemy's fortifications and penetrated their lines, also v.
breadth N. width; extent. We were impressed by the breadth of her knowledge.
brevity N. conciseness. Brevity is essential when you send a telegram or cablegram; you are charged for every word.
brindled ADJ. tawny or grayish with streaks or spots. He was disappointed in the litter because the puppies were brindled; he had hoped for animals of a uniform color.
bristling ADJ. rising like bristles; showing irritation. The dog stood there, bristling with anger.
brittle ADJ. easily broken; difficult. My employer's brittle personality made it difficult for me to get along with her.
broach v. introduce; open up. Jack did not even try to broach the subject of religion with his in-laws. If you broach a touchy subject, the result may be a breach.
brocade N. rich, figured fabric. The sofa was covered with expensive brocade.
brochure N. pamphlet. This brochure of farming was issued by the Department of Agriculture.
brooch N. ornamental clasp. She treasured the brooch because it was an heirloom.
brook v. tolerate; endure. The dean would brook no interference with his disciplinary actions, (secondary meaning)
browbeat v. bully; intimidate. Billy resisted Ted's attempts to browbeat him into handing over his lunch money.
browse v. graze; skim or glance at casually. "How now, brown cow, browsing in the green, green grass." I remember lines of verse that I came across while brows¬ing through the poetry section of the local bookstore.
brunt N. main impact or shock. Tom Sawyer claimed credit for painting the fence, but the brunt of the work fell on others. However, Tom bore the brunt of Aunt Polly's complaints when the paint began to peel.
brusque ADJ. blunt; abrupt. She was offended by his brusque reply.
buccaneer N. pirate. At Disneyland the Pirates of the Caribbean sing a song about their lives as bloody buccaneers.
bucolic ADJ. rustic; pastoral. Filled with browsing cows and bleating sheep, the meadow was a charmingly bucolic sight.
buffet N. table with food set out for people to serve themselves; meal at which people help themselves to food that's been set out. (Buffet rhymes with tray.) Please convey the soufflé on the tray to the buffet.
buffet v. slap; batter; knock about. To buffet something is to rough it up. (Buffet rhymes with Muffat.) Was Miss Muffat buffeted by the crowd on the way to the buffet tray?
buffoonery N. clowning. In the Ace Ventura movies, Jim Carrey's buffoonery was hilarious: like Bozo the Clown, he's a natural buffoon.
bugaboo N. bugbear; object of baseless terror. If we become frightened by such bugaboos, we are no wiser than the birds who fear scarecrows.
bullion N. gold and silver in the form of bars. Much bullion is stored in the vaults at Fort Knox.
bulwark N. earthwork or other strong defense; person who defends. The navy is our principal bulwark against invasion.
bungle v. mismanage; blunder. Don't botch this assignment, Bum stead; if you bungle the job, you're fired!
buoyant ADJ. able to float; cheerful and optimistic. When the boat capsized, her buoyant life jacket kept Jody afloat. Scrambling back on board, she was still in a buoyant mood, certain that despite the delay she'd win the race, buoyancy, N.
bureaucracy N. overregulated administrative system marked by red tape. The Internal Revenue Service is the ultimate bureaucracy, taxpayers wasted so much paper filling out IRS forms that the IRS bureaucrats printed up a new set of rules requiring taxpayers to comply with the Paperwork Reduction Act. bureaucratic, ADJ.
burgeon   v. grow forth; send out buds. In the spring, the plants that burgeon are a promise of the beauty that is to come.
burlesque v. give an imitation that ridicules. In Galaxy Quest, Alan Rickman burlesques Mr. Spock of Star Trek, outrageously parodying Spock's unemotional manner and stiff bearing, also N.
burnish   v. make shiny by rubbing; polish. The maid burnished the brass fixtures until they reflected the lamplight.
buttress   v.  support;  prop  up.  Just as  architects, buttress the walls of cathedrals with flying buttresses, debaters buttress their arguments with facts, also N.
buxom ADJ. full-bosomed; plump; jolly. High-fashion models usually are slender rather than buxom.




