deciduous ADJ. falling off, as of leaves. The oak is a deciduous tree.
decimate v. kill, usually one out of ten. We do more to decimate our population in automobile accidents than we do in war.
decipher v. decode. I could not decipher the doctor's handwriting.
declivity N. downward slope. The children loved to ski down the declivity.
decollate ADJ. having a low-cut neckline. Fashion decrees that evening gowns be decollate this season; bare shoulders are again the vogue.
decomposition N. decay. Despite the body's advanced state of decomposition, the police were able to identify the murdered man.
decorum N. propriety; orderliness and good taste in manners. Even the best-mannered students have trouble behaving with decorum on the last day of school, decorous, ADJ.
decoy N. lure or bait. The wild ducks were not fooled by the decoy, also v.
decrepitude N. state of collapse caused by illness or old age. I was unprepared for the state of decrepitude in which I had found my old friend; he seemed to have aged twenty years in six months.
decry v. express strong disapproval of; disparage. The founder of the Children's Defense Fund, Marian Wright Edelman, strongly decry lack of financial and moral support for children in America today.
deducible ADJ. derived by reasoning. If we accept your premise, your conclusions are easily deducible.
deface v. mar; disfigure. If you deface a library book you will have to pay a hefty fine.
defame v. harm someone's reputation; malign; slander. If you try to defame my good name, my lawyers will see you in court. If rival 'candidates persist in defaming one another, the voters may conclude that all politicians are crooks, defamation, N. default   N. failure to act. When the visiting team failed to show up for the big game, they lost the game by default. When Jack failed to make the payments on his Jaguar, the dealership took back the car because he had defaulted on his debt.
defeatist ADJ. resigned to defeat; accepting defeat as a natural outcome. If you maintain your defeatist attitude, you will never succeed, also N.
defection N. desertion. The children, who had made him an idol, were hurt most by his defection from our cause.
defer v. delay till later; exempt temporarily. In wartime, some young men immediately volunteer to serve; others defer making plans until they hear from their draft boards. During the Vietnam War, many young men, hoping to be deferred, requested student deferments.
defer v. give in respectfully; submit. When it comes to making decisions about purchasing software, we must defer to Michael, our computer guru; he has the final word. Michael, however, can defer these questions to no one; only he can decide.
deference   N. courteous regard for another's wish. In deference to the minister's request, please do not take photographs during the wedding service.
defiance N. refusal to yield; resistance. When John reached the "terrible two's," he responded to every parental request with howls of defiance, defy, v. defiant, ADJ.
defile v. pollute; profane. The hoodlums defiled the church with their scurrilous writing.
definitive ADJ. most reliable or complete. Carl Sandburg's Abraham Lincoln may be regarded as the definitive work on the life of the Great Emancipator.
deflect v. turn aside. His life was saved when his cigarette case deflected the bullet.
defoliate v. destroy leaves. In Vietnam the army made extensive use of chemical agents to defoliate the woodlands.
defray v. provide for the payment of. Her employer offered to defray the costs of her postgraduate education.
defrock v. to strip a priest or minister of church authority. We knew the minister had violated church regulations, but we had not realized his offense was serious enough to cause him to be defrocked.
deft ADJ. neat; skillful. The deft waiter uncorked the champagne without spilling a drop.
defunct ADJ. dead; no longer in use or existence. The lawyers sought to examine the books of the defunct corporation.
degenerate v. become worse; deteriorate. As the fight dragged on, the champion's style degenerated until he could barely keep on his feet.
degradation N. humiliation; debasement; degeneration. Some secretaries object to fetching the boss a cup of coffee because they resent the degradation of being made to perform such lowly tasks, degrade, v.
dehydrate v. remove water from; dry out. Running under a hot sun quickly dehydrates the body; joggers avoid dehydration by carrying water bottles and drinking from them frequently.
deify v. turn into a god; idolize. Admire the rock star all you want; just don't deify him.
deign v. condescend; stoop. The celebrated fashion designer would not deign to speak to a mere seamstress; his overburdened assistant had to convey the master's wishes to the lowly workers assembling his great designs.
delete v. erase; strike out. If you delete this paragraph, the composition will have more appeal.
deleterious ADJ. harmful. If you believe that smoking is deleterious to your health (and the Surgeon General surely does), then quit!
deliberate v. consider; ponder. Offered the new job, she asked for time to deliberate before she made her decision.
delineate v. portray; depict; sketch. Using only a few descriptive phrases, Austen delineates the character of Mr. Collins so well that we can predict his every move, delineation, N.
delirium N. mental disorder marked by confusion. In his delirium, the drunkard saw pink panthers and talking pigs. Perhaps he wasn't delirious: he might just have wandered into a movie house.
delta N. flat plain of mud or sand between branches of a river. His dissertation discussed the effect of intermittent flooding on the fertility of the Nile delta.
delude v. deceive. The mistress deludes herself into believing that her lover will leave his wife and marry her.
deluge N. flood; rush. When we advertised the position we received a deluge of applications, also v.
delusion N. false belief; hallucination. Don suffers from delusions of grandeur: he thinks he's a world-famous author when he's published just one paperback book.
delusive ADJ. deceptive; raising vain hopes. Do not raise your hopes on the basis of his delusive promises.
delve v. dig; investigate. Delving into old books and manuscripts is part of a researcher's job.
demagogue N. person who appeals to people's prejudice; false leader. He was accused of being a demagogue because he made promises that aroused futile hopes in his listeners.
demean v. degrade; humiliate. Standing on his dignity, he refused to demean himself by replying to the offensive letter. If you truly believed in the dignity of labor, you would not think it would demean you to work as a janitor.
demeanor N. behavior; bearing. His sober demeanor quieted the noisy revelers.
demented ADJ. insane. Doctor Dementor was a radio personality who liked to act as if he were truly demented. If you're demented, your mental state is out of whack; in other words, you're wacky.
demise N. death. Upon the demise of the dictator, a bitter dispute about succession to power developed.
demographic ADJ. related to population balance. In conducting a survey, one should take into account demographic trends in the region, demography, N.
demolition N. destruction. One of the major aims of the air force was the complete demolition of all means of transportation by the bombing of rail lines and terminals, demolish, v.
demoniac ADJ. fiendish. The Spanish Inquisition devised many demoniac means of torture, demon, N.
demotic ADJ. pertaining to the people. He lamented the passing of aristocratic society and maintained that a demotic society would lower the nation's standards.
demur v. object (because of doubts, scruples); hesitate. When offered a post on the board of directors, David demurred: he had scruples about taking on the job because he was unsure he could handle it in addition to his other responsibilities.
demure ADJ. grave; serious; coy. She was demure and reserved, a nice modest girl whom any young man would be proud to take home to his mother.
denigrate v. blacken. All attempts to denigrate the character of our late president have failed; the people still love him and cherish his memory.
denizen N. inhabitant or resident; regular visitor. In The Untouchables, Eliot Ness fights Al Capone and the other denizens of Chicago's underworld. Ness's fight against corruption was the talk of all the denizens of the local bars.
denotation N. meaning; distinguishing by name. A dictionary will always give us the denotation of a word; frequently, it will also give us its connotation.
denouement N. outcome; final development of the plot of a play or other literary work. The play was childishly written; the denouement was obvious to sophisticated theatergoers as early as the middle of the first act.
denounce v. condemn; criticize. The reform candidate denounced the corrupt city officers for having betrayed the public's trust, denunciation, N.
depict v. portray. In this sensational expose, the author depicts Beatle John Lennon as a drug-crazed neurotic. Do you question the accuracy of this depiction of Lennon?
deplete v. reduce; exhaust. We must wait until we deplete our present inventory before we order replacements.
deplore v. regret. Although I deplore the vulgarity of your language, I defend your right to express yourself freely.
deploy v. spread out [troops] in an extended though shallow battle line. The general ordered the battalion to deploy in order to meet the enemy offensive.
depose v. dethrone; remove from office. The army attempted to depose the king and set up a military government.
deposition N. testimony under oath. She made her deposition in the judge's chamber.
depravity N. extreme corruption; wickedness. The depravity of Caligula's behavior eventually sickened even those who had willingly participated in his earlier, comparatively innocent orgies, deprave, v.
deprecate v. express disapproval of; protest against; belittle. A firm believer in old-fashioned courtesy, Miss Post deprecated the modern tendency to address new acquaintances by their first names, deprecatory, ADJ.
depreciate v. lessen in value. If you neglect this property, it will depreciate.
depredation N. plundering. After the depredations of the invaders, the people were penniless.
deranged ADJ. insane. He had to be institutionalized because he was deranged.
derelict ADJ. abandoned; negligent. The derelict craft was a menace to navigation. Whoever abandoned it in the middle of the harbor was derelict in living up to his responsibilities as a boat owner, also N.
deride   v. ridicule; make fun of. The critics derided his pretentious dialogue and refused to consider his play seriously. Despite the critics' derision, however, audiences  were  moved   by  the  play,   cheering   its unabashedly sentimental conclusion, derisive, ADJ.
derivative   ADJ.  unoriginal;  obtained  from  another source. Although her early poetry was clearly derivative in nature, the critics thought she had promise and eventually would find her own voice.
dermatologist N. one who studies the skin and its diseases. I advise you to consult a dermatologist about your acne.
derogatory ADJ. expressing a low opinion. I resent your derogatory remarks.
descry v. catch sight of. In the distance, we could barely descry the enemy vessels.
desecrate v. profane; violate the sanctity of. Shattering the altar and trampling the holy objects underfoot, the invaders desecrated the sanctuary.
desiccate v. dry up. A tour of this smokehouse will give you an idea of how the pioneers used to desiccate food in order to preserve it.
desolate ADJ. unpopulated; joyless. After six months in the crowded, bustling metropolis, David was so sick of people that he was ready to head for the most desolate patch of wilderness he could find.
desolate v. rob of joy; lay waste to; forsake. The bandits desolated the countryside, burning farms and carrying off the harvest.
desperado N. reckless outlaw. Butch Cassidy was a bold desperado with a price on his head.
despise v. look on with scorn; regard as worthless or distasteful. Mr. Bond, I despise spies; I look down on them as mean, despicable, humorless men, whom I would wipe from the face of the earth with as little concern as I would scrape dog droppings from the bottom of my shoe.
despoil v. plunder. If you do not yield, I am afraid the enemy will despoil the countryside.
despondent ADJ. depressed; gloomy. To the distress of his parents, William became seriously despondent after he broke up with Jan. despondency, N.
despot N. tyrant; harsh, authoritarian ruler. How could a benevolent king turn overnight into a despot? despotism, N.
destitute ADJ. extremely poor. Because they had no health insurance, the father's costly illness left the family destitute, destitution, N.
desultory   ADJ. aimless; haphazard; digressing at random. In prison Malcolm X set himself the task of reading straight through the dictionary; to him, reading was purposeful, not desultory.
detached ADJ. emotionally removed; calm and objective; physically separate. A psychoanalyst must maintain a detached point of view and stay uninvolved with her patients' personal lives. To a child growing up in an apartment or a row house, to live in a detached house was an unattainable dream, (secondary meaning) detachment, N.
determinate ADJ. having a fixed order of procedure; invariable. At the royal wedding, the procession of the nobles followed a determinate order of precedence.
determination N. resolve; measurement or calculation; decision. Nothing could shake his determination that his children would get the best education that money could buy. Thanks to my pocket calculator, my determination of the answer to the problem took only seconds of my time.
deterrent   N. something that discourages; hindrance. Does the threat of capital punishment serve as a deterrent to potential killers? also ADJ.
detonation N. explosion. The detonation of the bomb could be heard miles away.
detraction N. slandering; aspersion. He is offended by your frequent detractions of his ability as a leader.
detrimental ADJ. harmful; damaging. The candidate's acceptance of major financial contributions from a well-known racist ultimately proved detrimental to his campaign, for he lost the backing of many of his early grassroots supporters, detriment, N.
deviate v. turn away from (a principle, norm); depart; diverge. Richard never deviated from his daily routine: every day he set off for work at eight o'clock, had his sack lunch at noon, and headed home at the stroke of five.
devious ADJ. roundabout; erratic; not straightforward. The Joker's plan was so devious that it was only with great difficulty we could follow its shifts and dodges.
devise v. think up; invent; plan. How clever he must be to have devised such a devious plan! What ingenious inventions might he have devised if he had turned his mind to science rather than crime.
devoid ADJ. lacking. You may think Cher's mind is a total void, but she's actually not devoid of intelligence. She just sounds like an airhead.
devolve v. deputize; pass to others. It devolved upon us, the survivors, to arrange peace terms with the enemy.
devotee N. enthusiastic follower. A devotee of the opera, she bought season tickets every year.
devout   ADJ. pious. The devout man prayed daily.
dexterous ADJ. skillful. The magician was so dexterous that we could not follow his movements as he performed his tricks.
diabolical ADJ. devilish. "What a fiend I am, to devise such a diabolical scheme to destroy Gotham City," chortled the Joker.
diadem N. crown. The king's diadem was on display at the museum.
dialectical ADJ. relating to the art of debate; mutual or reciprocal. The debate coach's students grew to develop great forensic skill. Teaching, however, is inherently a dialectical situation: the coach learned at least as much from her students as they learned from her. dialectics, N.
diaphanous ADJ. sheer; transparent. They saw the burglar clearly through the diaphanous curtain.
diatribe   N.  bitter  scolding;  invective.  During  the lengthy diatribe delivered by his opponent he remained calm and self-controlled.
dichotomy   N. split; branching into two parts (especially contradictory ones). Willie didn't know how to resolve the dichotomy between his ambition to go to college and his childhood longing to run away and join the circus. Then he heard about Ringling Brothers Circus College, and he knew he'd found his school.
dictum N. authoritative and weighty statement; saying; maxim. University administrations still follow the old dictum "Publish or perish." They don't care how good a teacher you are; if you don't publish enough papers, you're out of a job.
didactic ADJ. teaching; instructional. Pope's lengthy poem An Essay on Man is too didactic tor my taste: I dislike it when poets turn preachy and moralize, didacticism, N.
die N. device for stamping or impressing; mold. In coining pennies, workers at the old mint squeezed sheets of softened copper between two dies.
diffidence   N. shyness. You must overcome your diffidence if you intend to become a salesperson.
diffuse   ADJ. wordy; rambling; spread out (like a gas). If you pay authors by the word, you tempt them to produce diffuse manuscripts rather than brief ones, also v. diffusion, N.
digression   N.  wandering  away from the  subject. Nobody minded when Professor Renoir's lectures wandered away from their official theme; his digressions were always more fascinating than the topic of the day. digress, v.
dilapidated ADJ. ruined because of neglect. The dilapidated old building needed far more work than just a new coat of paint, dilapidation, N.
dilate v. expand. In the dark, the pupils of your eyes dilate.
dilatory ADJ. delaying. Your dilatory tactics may compel me to cancel the contract.
dilemma N. problem; choice of two unsatisfactory alternatives. In this dilemma, he knew no one to whom he could turn for advice.
dilettante N. aimless follower of the arts; amateur; dabbler. He was not serious in his painting; he was rather a dilettante.
diligence N. steadiness of effort; persistent hard work. Her employers were greatly impressed by her diligence and offered her a partnership in the firm.
dilute v. make less concentrated; reduce in strength. She preferred her coffee diluted with milk.
diminution N. lessening; reduction in size. Old Jack was as sharp at eighty as he had been at fifty; increasing age led to no diminution of his mental acuity.
din N. continued loud noise. The din of the jack-hammers outside the classroom window drowned out the lecturer's voice, also v.
dinghy N. small boat (often ship's boat). In the film Lifeboat, an ill-assorted group of passengers from a sunken ocean liner are marooned at sea in a dinghy.
dingy ADJ. dull; not fresh; cheerless. Refusing to be depressed by her dingy studio apartment, Bea spent the weekend polishing the floors and windows and hanging bright posters on the walls.
dint N. means; effort. By dint of much hard work, the volunteers were able to control the raging forest fire.
diorama N. life-size, three-dimensional scene from nature or history. Because they dramatically pose actual stuffed animals against realistic painted landscapes, the dioramas at the Museum of Natural History particularly impress high school biology students.
dire ADJ. disastrous. People ignored her dire predictions of an approaching depression.
dirge   N. lament with music. The funeral dirge stirred us to tears.
disabuse   v. correct a false impression; undeceive. I will attempt to disabuse you of your impression of my client's guilt; I know he is innocent.
disaffected ADJ. disloyal. Once the most loyal of Bradley's supporters, Senator Moynihan found himself becoming increasingly disaffected.
disapprobation N. disapproval; condemnation. The conservative father viewed his daughter's radical boyfriend with disapprobation.
disarray N. a disorderly or untidy state. After the New Year's party, the once orderly house was in total disarray.
disavowal N. denial; disclaiming. His disavowal of his part in the conspiracy was not believed by the jury, disavow, v.
disband v. dissolve; disperse. The chess club disbanded after its disastrous initial season.
disburse v. pay out. When you disburse money on the company's behalf, be sure to get a receipt.
discernible ADJ. distinguishable; perceivable. The ships in the harbor were not discernible in the fog. discerning   ADJ. mentally quick and observant; having insight. Though no genius, the star was sufficiently discerning to distinguish her true friends from the countless phonies who flattered her. discern, v. discernment, N.
disclaim v. disown; renounce claim to. If I grant you this privilege, will you disclaim all other rights?
disclose v. reveal. Although competitors offered him bribes, he refused to disclose any information about his company's forthcoming product, disclosure, N.
discombobulated ADJ. confused; discomposed. The novice square dancer became so discombobulated that he wandered into the wrong set.
discomfit v. put to rout; defeat; disconcert. This ruse will discomfit the enemy, discomfiture, N. discomfited, ADJ.
disconcert v. confuse; upset; embarrass. The lawyer was disconcerted by the evidence produced by her adversary.
disconsolate ADJ. sad. The death of his wife left him disconsolate.
discord N. conflict; lack of harmony. Watching Tweedledum battle Tweedledee, Alice wondered what had caused this pointless discord.
discordant   ADJ. not harmonious; conflicting. Nothing is quite so discordant as the sound of a junior high school orchestra tuning up.
discount v. disregard. Be prepared to discount what he has to say about his ex-wife.
discourse N. formal discussion; conversation. The young Plato was drawn to the Agora to hear the philosophical discourse of Socrates and his followers, also v.
discredit   v. defame; destroy confidence in; disbelieve. The campaign was highly negative in tone; each candidate tried to discredit the other.
discrepancy   N. lack of consistency; difference. The police noticed some discrepancies in his description of the crime and did not believe him.
discrete   ADJ. separate; unconnected. The universe is composed of discrete bodies.
discretion N. prudence; ability to adjust actions to circumstances. Use your discretion in this matter and do not discuss it with anyone, discreet, ADJ.
discriminating ADJ. able to see differences; prejudiced. A superb interpreter of Picasso, she was sufficiently discriminating to judge the most complex works of modern art. discrimination, N.
discursive ADJ. digressing; rambling. As the lecturer wandered from topic to topic, we wondered what if any point there was to his discursive remarks.
disdain v. view with scorn or contempt. In the film Funny Face, the bookish heroine disdained fashion models for their lack of intellectual interests, also N.
disembark v. go ashore; unload cargo from a ship. Before the passengers could disembark, they had to pick up their passports from the ship's purser.
disenfranchise v. deprive of a civil right. The imposition of the poll tax effectively disenfranchised poor Southern blacks, who lost their right to vote.
disengage v. uncouple; separate; disconnect. A standard movie routine involves the hero's desperate attempt to disengage a railroad car from a moving train.
disfigure v. mar the appearance of; spoil. An ugly frown disfigured her normally pleasant face.
disgorge v. surrender something; eject; vomit. Unwilling to disgorge the cash he had stolen from the pension fund, the embezzler tried to run away.
disgruntle v. make discontented. The passengers were disgruntled by the numerous delays.
dishearten   v. discourage. His failure to pass the bar exam disheartened him.
disheveled   ADJ. untidy. Your disheveled appearance will hurt your chances in this interview.
disinclination   N. unwillingness. Some mornings I feel a great disinclination to get out of bed.
disingenuous   ADJ. not naive; sophisticated. Although he was  young,   his  remarks  indicated  that  he was disingenuous.
disinter   v. dig up; unearth. They disinterred the body and held an autopsy.
disinterested   ADJ.  unprejudiced.  Given the judge's political ambitions and the lawyers' financial interest in the case, the only disinterested person in the courtroom may have been the court reporter.
disjointed   ADJ. disconnected. His remarks were so disjointed that we could not follow his reasoning.
disjunction N. act or state of separation; disunity. Believing the mind could greatly affect the body's health, the holistic doctor rejected the notion of a necessary disjunction of mind and body.
dislodge v. remove (forcibly). Thrusting her fist up under the choking man's lower ribs, Margaret used the Heimlich maneuver to dislodge the food caught in his throat.
dismantle v. take apart. When the show closed, they dismantled the scenery before storing it.
dismember v. cut into small parts. When the Austrian Empire was dismembered, several new countries were established.
dismiss    v.   eliminate  from   consideration;   reject. Believing in John's love for her, she dismissed the notion that he might be unfaithful, (secondary meaning)
disparage   v. belittle. A doting mother, Emma was more  likely to praise her son's crude attempts at art than to disparage them.
disparate   ADJ. basically different; unrelated. Unfortunately Tony  and  Tina  have   disparate notions  of marriage: Tony sees it as a carefree extended love affair, while Tina sees it as a solemn commitment to build a family and a home.
disparity N. difference; condition of inequality. Their disparity m rank made no difference at all to the prince and Cinderella.
dispassionate ADJ. calm; impartial. Known in the company for his cool judgment, Bill could impartially examine the causes of a problem, giving a dispassionate analysis of what had gone wrong, and go on to suggest how to correct the mess.
dispatch N. speediness; prompt execution; message sent with all due speed. Young Napoleon defeated the enemy with all possible dispatch; he then sent a dispatch to headquarters, informing his commander of the great victory, also v.
dispel v. scatter; drive away; cause to vanish. The bright sunlight eventually dispelled the morning mist.
disperse v. scatter. The police fired tear gas into the crowd to disperse the protesters, dispersion, N.
dispirited ADJ. lacking in spirit. The coach used all the tricks at his command to buoy up the enthusiasm of his team, which had become dispirited at the loss of the star player.
disport v. amuse. The popularity of Florida as a winter resort is constantly increasing; each year, thousands more disport themselves at Miami and Palm Beach.
disputatious ADJ. argumentative; fond of arguing. Convinced he knew more than his lawyers, Tony was a disputatious client, ready to argue about the best way to conduct the case.
disquietude N. uneasiness; anxiety. When Holmes had been gone for a day, Watson felt only a slight sense of disquietude, but after a week with no word, Watson's uneasiness about his missing friend had grown into a deep fear for Holmes's safety, disquiet, v., N.
disquisition N. a formal systematic inquiry; an explanation of the results of a formal inquiry. In his disquisition, he outlined the steps he had taken in reaching his conclusions.
dissection N. analysis; cutting apart in order to examine. The dissection of frogs in the laboratory is particularly unpleasant to some students.
dissemble   v. disguise; pretend. Even though John tried to dissemble his motive for taking modern dance, we all knew he was there not to dance but to meet girls.
disseminate   v. distribute; spread; scatter (like seeds). By their use of the Internet, propagandists have been able to disseminate their pet doctrines to new audiences around the globe.
dissent v. disagree. In the recent Supreme Court decision, Justice O'Connor dissented from the majority opinion, also N.
dissertation N. formal essay. In order to earn a graduate degree from many of our universities, a candidate is frequently required to prepare a dissertation on some scholarly subject.
dissident ADJ. dissenting; rebellious. In the purge that followed the student demonstrations at Tianamen Square, the government hunted down the dissident students and their supporters, also N.
dissimulate v. pretend; conceal by feigning. She tried to dissimulate her grief by her exuberant attitude.
dissipate v. squander; waste; scatter. He is a fine artist, but I fear he may dissipate his gifts if he keeps wasting his time playing Trivial Pursuit.
dissolution    N. disintegration; looseness in morals. The profligacy and  dissolution of life in Caligula's Rome appall some historians, dissolute, ADJ.
dissonance   N. discord; opposite of harmony. Composer Charles Ives often used dissonance clashing or unresolved chords for special effects in his musical works, dissonant, ADJ.
dissuade v. persuade not to do; discourage. Since Tom could not dissuade Huck from running away from home, he decided to run away with his friend, dissuasion, N.
distant ADJ. reserved or aloof; cold in manner. Her distant greeting made me feel unwelcome from the start, (secondary meaning)
distend   v. expand; swell out. I can tell when he is under stress  by the way the veins  distend on  his forehead.
distill   v. purify; refine; concentrate. A moonshiner distills mash into whiskey; an epigrammatist distills thoughts into quips.
distinction N. honor; contrast; discrimination. A holder of the Medal of Honor, George served with great distinction in World War II. He made a distinction, however, between World War II and Vietnam, which he considered an immoral conflict.
distort v. twist out of shape. It is difficult to believe the newspaper accounts of the riots because of the way some reporters distort and exaggerate the actual events. distortion, N.
distrait ADJ. absentminded. Because of his concentration on the problem, the professor often appeared distrait and unconcerned about routine.
distraught ADJ. upset; distracted by anxiety. The distraught parents frantically searched the ravine for their lost child.
diurnal ADJ. daily. A farmer cannot neglect his diurnal tasks at any time; cows, for example, must be milked regularly.
diva N. operatic singer; prima donna. Although world famous as a diva, she did not indulge in fits of temperament.
diverge   v. vary; go in different directions from the same point. The spokes of the wheel diverge from the hub.
divergent ADJ. differing; deviating. Since graduating from medical school, the two doctors have followed divergent paths, the one going on to become a nationally prominent surgeon, the other dedicating himself to a small family practice in his hometown, divergence, N.
diverse ADJ. differing in some characteristics; various. The professor suggested diverse ways of approaching the assignment and recommended that we choose one of them.
diversion N. act of turning aside; pastime. After studying for several hours, he needed a diversion from work, divert, v.
diversity N. variety; dissimilitude. The diversity of colleges in this country indicates that many levels of ability are being served.
divest   v. strip; deprive. He was divested of his power to act and could no longer govern, divestiture, N.
divine v. perceive intuitively; foresee the future. Nothing infuriated Tom more than Aunt Polly's ability to divine when he was not telling the truth.
divulge v. reveal. No lover of gossip, Charlotte would never divulge anything that a friend told her in confidence.
docile ADJ. obedient; easily managed. As docile as he seems today, that old lion was once a ferocious, snarling beast, docility, N.
docket N. program as for trial; book where such entries are made. The case of Smith v. Jones was entered in the docket for July 15. also v.
doctrinaire ADJ. unable to compromise about points of doctrine; dogmatic; unyielding. Weng had hoped that the student-led democracy movement might bring about change in China, but the repressive response of the doctrinaire hard-liners crushed his dreams of democracy.
doctrine N. teachings in general; particular principle (religious, legal, etc.) taught. He was so committed to the doctrines of his faith that he was unable to evaluate them impartially.
document   v. provide written evidence. She kept all the receipts from her business trip in order to document her expenses for the firm, also N.
doddering ADJ. shaky; infirm from old age. Although he is not as yet a doddering and senile old man, his ideas and opinions no longer can merit the respect we gave them years ago.
doff v. take off. A gentleman used to doff his hat to a lady.
dogged ADJ. determined; stubborn. Les Miserables tells of Inspector Javert's long, dogged pursuit of the criminal Jean Valjean.
doggerel N. poor verse. Although we find occasional snatches of genuine poetry in her work, most of her writing is mere doggerel.
dogmatic   ADJ. opinionated; arbitrary; doctrinal. We tried to discourage Doug from being so dogmatic, but never could convince him that his opinions might be wrong.
doldrums N. blues; listlessness; slack period. Once the excitement of meeting her deadline was over, she found herself in the doldrums.
dolorous ADJ. sorrowful. He found the dolorous lamentations of the bereaved family emotionally disturbing and he left as quickly as he could.
dolt N. stupid person. I thought I was talking to a mature audience; instead, I find myself addressing a pack of dolts.
domicile N. home. Although his legal domicile was in New York City, his work kept him away from his residence for many years, also v.
domineer v. rule over tyrannically. Students prefer teachers who guide, not ones who domineer.
don v. put on. When Clark Kent had to don his Superman outfit, he changed clothes in a convenient phone booth.
dormant ADJ. sleeping; lethargic; latent. At fifty her dormant ambition to write flared up once more; within a year she had completed the first of her great historical novels, dormancy, N.
dormer N. window projecting from roof. In remodeling the attic into a bedroom, we decided that we needed to put in dormers to provide sufficient ventilation for the new room.
dorsal ADJ. relating to the back of an animal. A shark may be identified by its dorsal fin, which projects above the surface of the ocean.
dossier N. file of documents on a subject. Ordered by J. Edgar Hoover to investigate the senator, the FBI compiled a complete dossier on him.
dotage N. senility. In his dotage, the old man bored us with long tales of events in his childhood.
dote v. be excessively fond of; show signs of mental decline. Not only grandmothers bore you with stories about their brilliant grandchildren; grandfathers dote on the little rascals, too.
dour ADJ. sullen; stubborn. The man was dour and taciturn.
douse v. plunge into water; drench; extinguish. They doused each other with hoses and water balloons.
dowdy ADJ. slovenly; untidy. She tried to change her dowdy image by buying a fashionable new wardrobe.
downcast ADJ. disheartened; sad. Cheerful and optimistic by nature, Beth was never downcast despite the difficulties she faced.
drab ADJ. dull; lacking color; cheerless. The Dutch woman's drab winter coat contrasted with the distinctive, colorful native costume she wore beneath it.
draconian ADJ. extremely severe. When the principal canceled the senior prom because some seniors had been late to school that week, we thought the draconian punishment was far too harsh for such a minor violation of the rules.
dregs N. sediment; worthless residue. David poured the wine carefully to avoid stirring up the dregs.
drivel N. nonsense; foolishness. Why do I have to spend my days listening to such idiotic drivel? Drivel is related to dribble: think of a dribbling, driveling idiot.
droll ADJ. queer and amusing. He was a popular guest because his droll anecdotes were always entertaining.
drone N. idle person; male bee. Content to let his wife support him, the would-be writer was in reality nothing but a drone.
drone v. talk dully; buzz or murmur like a bee. On a gorgeous day, who wants to be stuck in a classroom listening to the teacher drone?
dross N. waste matter; worthless impurities. Many methods have been devised to separate the valuable metal from the dross.
drudgery N. menial work. Cinderella's fairy godmother rescued her from a life of drudgery.
dubious ADJ. questionable; filled with doubt. Some critics of the GRE contend the test is of dubious worth. Tony claimed he could get a perfect score on the test, but Tina was dubious: she knew he hadn't cracked a book in three years, dubiety, N.
ductile ADJ. malleable; flexible; pliable. Copper is an extremely ductile material: you can stretch it into the thinnest of wires, bend it, even wind it into loops, ductility, N.
dulcet ADJ. sweet sounding. The dulcet sounds of the birds at dawn were soon drowned out by the roar of traffic passing our motel.
dumbfound v. astonish. Egbert's perfect score on the GRE dumbfounded his classmates, who had always considered him to be utterly dumb.
dupe N. someone easily fooled. While the gullible Watson often was made a dupe by unscrupulous parties, Sherlock Holmes was far more difficult to fool.
duplicity N. double-dealing; hypocrisy. When Tanya learned that Mark had been two-timing her, she was furious at his duplicity, duplicitous, ADJ.
duration N. length of time something lasts. Because she wanted the children to make a good impression on the dinner guests, Mother promised them a treat if they'd behave well for the duration of the meal.
duress N. forcible restraint, especially unlawfully. The hostages were held under duress until the prisoners' demands were met.
dutiful ADJ. respectful; obedient. When Mother told Billy to kiss Great-Aunt Hattie, the boy obediently gave the old woman a dutiful peck on her cheek.
dwindle v. shrink; reduce. The food in the lifeboat gradually dwindled away to nothing.
dynamic ADJ. energetic; vigorously active. The dynamic aerobics instructor kept her students on the run; she was a little dynamo.
dyspeptic ADJ. suffering from indigestion. All the talk about rich food made him feel dyspeptic, dyspepsia, N.
