earthy ADJ. unrefined; coarse. His earthy remarks often embarrassed the women in his audience.
ebb v. recede; lessen. Sitting on the beach, Mrs. Dalloway watched the tide ebb: the waters receded, drawing away from her as she sat there all alone, also N.
ebullient   ADJ. showing excitement; overflowing with enthusiasm.   Amy's   ebullient  nature   could   not   be repressed;   she  was  always  bubbling  over with  excitement, ebullience, N.
eccentric ADJ. irregular; odd; whimsical; bizarre. The comet veered dangerously close to the earth in its eccentric orbit. People came up with some eccentric ideas for dealing with the emergency: one kook suggested tying a knot in the comet's tail!
eccentricity N. oddity; idiosyncrasy. Some of his friends tried to account for his rudeness to strangers as the eccentricity of genius.
ecclesiastic ADJ. pertaining to the church. The minister donned his ecclesiastic garb and walked to the pulpit, also N.
eclectic   ADJ. selective; composed of elements drawn from disparate sources. His style of interior decoration was eclectic: bits and pieces of furnishings from widely divergent  periods, strikingly juxtaposed  to  create  a unique decor, eclecticism, N.
eclipse v. darken; extinguish; surpass. The new stock market high eclipsed the previous record set in 1985.
ecologist N. person concerned with the interrelationship between living organisms and their environment. The ecologist was concerned that the new dam would upset the natural balance of the creatures living in Glen Canyon.
economy N. efficiency or conciseness in using something. Reading the epigrams of Pope, I admire the economy of his verse: in few words he conveys worlds of meaning, (secondary meaning)
ecstasy N. rapture; joy; any overpowering emotion. When Allison received her long-hoped-for letter of acceptance from Harvard, she was in ecstasy, ecstatic, ADJ.
eddy N. swirling current of water, air, etc. The water in the tide pool was still, except for an occasional eddy, also v.
edict N. decree (especially one issued by a sovereign); official command. The emperor issued an edict decreeing that everyone should come see him model his magnificent new clothes.
edify v. instruct; correct morally. Although his purpose was to edify and not to entertain his audience, many of his listeners were amused and not enlightened.
eerie ADJ. weird. In that eerie setting, it was easy to believe in ghosts and other supernatural beings.
efface v. rub out. The coin had been handled so many times that its date had been effaced.
effectual ADJ. able to produce a desired effect; valid. Medical researchers are concerned because of the development of drug-resistant strains of bacteria; many once-useful antibiotics are no longer effectual in curing bacterial infections.
effeminate ADJ. having womanly traits. His voice was high-pitched and effeminate.
effervescence N. inner excitement or exuberance; bubbling from fermentation or carbonation. Nothing depressed Sue for long; her natural effervescence soon reasserted itself. Soda that loses its effervescence goes flat, effervescent, ADJ. effervesce, v.
effete ADJ. worn out; exhausted; barren. The literature of the age reflected the effete condition of the writers; no new ideas were forthcoming.
efficacy   N.  power to produce desired effect. The efficacy of this drug depends on the regularity of the dosage, efficacious, ADJ.
effigy N. dummy. The mob showed its irritation by hanging the judge in effigy.
effluvium N. noxious smell. Air pollution has become a serious problem in our major cities; the effluvium and the poisons in the air are hazards to life, effluvia, PL.
effrontery   N.  shameless  boldness.  She  had  the effrontery to insult the guest.
effusion N. pouring forth. The critics objected to her literary effusion because it was too flowery.
effusive ADJ. pouring forth; gushing. Her effusive manner of greeting her friends finally began to irritate them.
egoism N. excessive interest in one's self; belief that one should be interested in one's self rather than in others. His egoism prevented him from seeing the needs of his colleagues.
egotistical ADJ. excessively self-centered; self-important; conceited. Typical egotistical remark: "But enough of this chitchat about you and your little problems. Let's talk about what's really important: me!" egotistic, ADJ. egotism, N.
egregious ADJ. notorious; conspicuously bad or shocking. She was an egregious liar; we all knew better than to believe a word she said. Ed's housekeeping was egregious: he let his dirty dishes pile up so long that they were stuck together with last week's food.
egress N. exit. Barnum's sign "To the Egress" fooled many people who thought they were going to see an animal and instead found themselves in the street.
ejaculation N. exclamation. He could not repress an ejaculation of surprise when he heard the news.
elaboration N. addition of details; intricacy. Tell what happened simply, without any elaboration, elaborate, v.
elated ADJ. overjoyed; in high spirits. Grinning from ear to ear, Bonnie Blair was clearly elated by her fifth Olympic gold medal, elation, N.
elegy   N. poem or song expressing lamentation. On the death  of  Edward  King,  Milton  composed the  elegy "Lycidas." elegiacal, ADJ.
elicit   v. draw out by discussion. The detectives tried to elicit where he had hidden his loot.
elixir N. cure-all; something invigorating. The news of her chance to go abroad acted on her like an elixir.
ellipsis N. omission of words from a text. Sometimes an ellipsis can lead to a dangling modifier, as in the sentence "Once dressed, ... you should refrigerate the potato salad."
elliptical ADJ. oval; ambiguous, either purposely or because key words have been left out. An elliptical billiard ball wobbles because it is not perfectly round; an elliptical remark baffles because it is not perfectly clear.
eloquence N. expressiveness; persuasive speech. The crowds were stirred by Martin Luther King's eloquence.
elucidate v. explain; enlighten. He was called upon to elucidate the disputed points in his article.
elusive ADJ. evasive; baffling; hard to grasp. Trying to pin down exactly when the contractors would be done remodeling the house, Nancy was frustrated by their elusive replies, elude, v.
elysian ADJ. relating to paradise; blissful. An afternoon sail on the bay was for her an elysian journey.
emaciated ADJ. thin and wasted. His long period of starvation had left him emaciated.
emanate v. issue forth. A strong odor of sulfur emanated from the spring.
emancipate v. set free. At first, the attempts of the Abolitionists to emancipate the slaves were unpopular in New England as well as in the South.
embargo N. ban on commerce or other activity. As a result of the embargo, trade with the colonies was at a standstill.
embark v. commence; go on board a boat; begin a journey. In devoting herself to the study of gorillas, Dian Fossey embarked on a course of action that was to cost her her life.
embed v. enclose; place in something. Tales of actual historical figures like King Alfred have become embedded in legends.
embellish v. adorn; ornament; enhance, as a story. The costume designer embellished the leading lady's ball gown with yards and yards of ribbon and lace.
embezzlement N. stealing. The bank teller confessed his embezzlement of the funds.
emboss v. produce a design in raised relief. The secretary of the corporation uses a special stamp to emboss the corporate seal on all official documents.
embrace v. hug; adopt or espouse; accept readily; encircle; include. Clasping Maid Marian in his arms, Robin Hood embraced her lovingly. In joining the outlaws in Sherwood Forest, she had openly embraced their cause, also N.
embroider v. decorate with needlework; ornament with fancy or fictitious details. For her mother's birthday, Beth embroidered a lovely design on a handkerchief. When asked what made her late getting home, Jo embroidered her account with tales of runaway horses and rescuing people from a ditch, embroidery, N.
embroil v. throw into confusion; involve in strife; entangle. He became embroiled in the heated discussion when he tried to arbitrate the dispute.
embryonic ADJ. undeveloped; rudimentary. The evil of class and race hatred must be eliminated while it is still in an embryonic state; otherwise, it may grow to dangerous proportions.
emend v. correct, usually a text. The critic emended the book by retranslating several passages.
emendation N. correction of errors; improvement. Please initial all the emendations you have made in this contract.
emetic N. substance causing vomiting. Ingesting an emetic like mustard is useful in some cases of poisoning.
eminent ADJ. high; lofty. After her appointment to this eminent position, she seldom had time for her former friends.
emissary N. agent; messenger. The Secretary of State was sent as the president's special emissary to the conference on disarmament.
emollient N. soothing or softening remedy. He applied an emollient to the inflamed area, also ADJ.
emolument N. salary; compensation. In addition to the emolument this position offers, you must consider the social prestige it carries with it.
empathy N. ability to identify with another's feelings, ideas, etc. What made Ann such a fine counselor was her empathy, her ability to put herself in her client's place and feel his emotions as if they were her own. empathize, v.
empirical   ADJ. based on experience. He distrusted hunches and intuitive flashes; he placed his reliance entirely on empirical data.
emulate   v. imitate; rival. In a brief essay, describe a person you admire, someone whose virtues you would like to emulate.
enamored ADJ. in love. Narcissus became enamored of his own beauty.
encipher v. encode; convert a message into code. In one of Bond's first lessons he learned how to encipher the messages he sent to Miss Moneypenny so that none of his other lady friends could read them.
enclave N. territory enclosed within an alien land. The Vatican is an independent enclave in Italy.
encomiastic ADJ. praising; eulogistic. Some critics believe that his encomiastic statements about Napoleon were inspired by his desire for material advancement rather than by an honest belief in the Emperor's genius.
encomium N. high praise; eulogy. Uneasy with the encomiums expressed by his supporters, Tolkien felt unworthy of such high praise.
encompass v. surround. Although we were encompassed by enemy forces, we were cheerful for we were well stocked and could withstand a siege until our allies joined us.
encroachment N. gradual intrusion. The encroachment of the factories upon the neighborhood lowered the value of the real estate.
encumber v. burden. Some people encumber themselves with too much luggage when they take short trips.
endearment N. fond word or act. Your gifts and endearments cannot make me forget your earlier insolence.
endemic   ADJ. prevailing among a specific group of people or in a specific area or country. This disease is endemic in this part of the world; more than 80 percent of the population are at one time or another affected by it.
endorse v. approve; support. Everyone waited her see which one of the rival candidates for the city council the mayor would endorse, (secondary meaning) endorsement, N.
endue v. provide with some quality; endow. He was endued with a lion's courage.
enduring ADJ. lasting; surviving. Keats believed in the enduring power of great art, which would outlast its creators' brief lives.
energize v. invigorate; make forceful and active. Rather than exhausting Maggie, dancing energized her.
enervate   v. weaken. She was slow to recover from her illness; even a short walk to the window enervated her. enervation, N,
enfranchise v. admit to the rights of citizenship (especially the right to vote). Although blacks were enfranchised shortly after the Civil War, women did not receive the right to vote until 1920.
engage v. attract; hire; pledge oneself; confront. "Your case has engaged my interest, my lord," said Holmes. "You may engage my services."
engaging ADJ. charming; attractive. Everyone liked Nancy's pleasant manners and engaging personality.
engender   v. cause; produce. To receive praise formal accomplishments engenders self-confidence in a child.
engross v. occupy fully. John was so engrossed in his studies that he did not hear his mother call.
enhance   v. increase; improve. You can enhance your chances of being admitted to the college of your choice by learning to write well; an excellent essay will enhance any application.
enigma N. puzzle; mystery. "What do women want?" asked Dr. Sigmund Freud. Their behavior was an enigma to him.
enigmatic ADJ. obscure; puzzling. Many have sought to fathom the enigmatic smile of the Mona Lisa.
enjoin v. command; order; forbid. The owners of the company asked the court to enjoin the union from picketing the plant.
enmity N. ill will; hatred. At Camp David President Carter labored to bring an end to the enmity that prevented Egypt and Israel from living in peace.
ennui N. boredom. The monotonous routine of hospital life induced a feeling of ennui that made her moody and irritable.
enormity N. hugeness (in a bad sense). He did not realize the enormity of his crime until he saw what suffering he had caused.
enrapture v. please intensely. The audience was enrap¬tured by the freshness of the voices and the excellent orchestration.
ensconce v. settle comfortably. Now that their children were ensconced safely in the private school, the jet-setting parents decided to leave for Europe.
ensue v. follow. The evils that ensued were the direct result of the miscalculations of the leaders.
entail v. require; necessitate; involve. Building a college-level vocabulary will entail some work on your part.
enterprising ADJ. full of initiative. By coming up with fresh ways to market the company's products, Mike proved himself to be an enterprising businessman.
enthrall v. capture; enslave. From the moment he saw her picture, he was enthralled by her beauty.
entice v. lure; attract; tempt. She always tried to entice her baby brother into mischief.
entity N. real being. As soon as the charter was adopted, the United Nations became an entity and had to be considered as a factor in world diplomacy.
entomology N. study of insects. Kent found entomology the most annoying part of his biology course; studying insects bugged him.
entrance v. put under a spell; carry away with emotion. Shafts of sunlight on a wall could entrance her and leave her spellbound:
entreat v. plead; ask earnestly. She entreated her father to let her stay out till midnight.
entree N. entrance; a way in. Because of his wealth and social position, he had entree into the most exclusive circles.
entrepreneur N. businessperson; contractor. Opponents of our present tax program argue that it discourages entrepreneurs from trying new fields of business activity.
enumerate v. list; mention one by one. Huck hung his head in shame as Miss Watson enumerated his many flaws.
enunciate v. utter or speak, especially distinctly. Stop mumbling! How will people understand you if you do not enunciate clearly?
environ v. enclose; surround. In medieval days, Paris was environed by a wall, environs, N.
eon N. long period of time; an age. It has taken eons for our civilization to develop.
epaulet N. ornament worn on the shoulder (of a uniform, etc.). The shoulder loops on Sam Spade's trench coat are the nonmilitary counterparts of the fringed epaulets on George Washington's uniform.
ephemeral ADJ. short-lived; fleeting. The mayfly is an ephemeral creature: its adult life lasts little more than a day.
epic N. long heroic poem, novel, or similar work of art. Kurosawa's film Seven Samurai is an epic portraying the struggle of seven warriors to destroy a band of robbers, also ADJ.
epicure N. connoisseur of food and drink. Epicures frequent this restaurant because it features exotic wines and dishes, epicurean, ADJ.
epigram N. witty thought or saying, usually short. Poor Richard's epigrams made Benjamin Franklin famous.
epilogue N. short speech at conclusion of dramatic work. The audience was so disappointed in the play that many did not remain to hear the epilogue.
episodic ADJ. loosely connected. Though he tried to follow the plot of Gravity's Rainbow, John found the novel too episodic.
epistemologist N. philosopher who studies the nature of knowledge. "What is more important, a knowledge of nature or the nature of knowledge?" the epistemologist asked the naturalist.
epitaph N. inscription in memory of a dead person. In his will, he dictated the epitaph he wanted placed on his tombstone.
epithet N. word or phrase characteristically used to describe a person or thing. So many kings of France were named Charles that modern students need epithets to tell them apart: Charles the Wise, for example, was someone far different from Charles the Fat.
epitome N. perfect example or embodiment. Singing "I am the very model of a modern Major-General" in The Pirates of Penzance, Major-General Stanley proclaimed himself the epitome of an officer and a gentleman, epitomize, v.
epoch N. period of time. The glacial epoch lasted for thousands of years.
equable ADJ. tranquil; steady; uniform. After the hot summers and cold winters of New England, she found the climate of the West Indies equable and pleasant.
equanimity N. calmness of temperament; composure. Even the inevitable strains of caring for an ailing mother did not disturb Bea's equanimity.
equestrian N. rider on horseback. These paths in the park are reserved for equestrians and their steeds, also ADJ.
equilibrium N. balance. After the divorce, he needed some time to regain his equilibrium.
equine ADJ. resembling a horse. Her long, bony face had an equine look to it.
equinox N. period of equal days and nights; the beginning of spring and autumn. The vernal equinox Is usually marked by heavy rainstorms.
equipoise N. balance; balancing force; equilibrium. The high-wire acrobat used his pole as an equipoise to overcome the swaying caused by the wind.
equitable ADJ. fair; impartial. I am seeking an equitable solution to this dispute, one that will be fair and acceptable to both sides.
equity   N. fairness; justice. Our courts guarantee equity to all.
equivocal   ADJ.   ambiguous;   intentionally  misleading. Rejecting  the  candidate's  equivocal comments  on tax reform, the reporters pressed him to state clearly here he stood on the issue, equivocate, v. equivocation, N.
equivocate   v. lie; mislead; attempt to conceal the truth. The audience saw through his attempts to equivocate on the subject under discussion and ridiculed his remarks.
erode v. eat away. The limestone was eroded by the dripping water until only a thin shell remained, erosion, N.
erotic ADJ. pertaining to passionate love. The erotic passages in this novel should be removed as they are merely pornographic.
errant ADJ. wandering. Many a charming tale has been written about the knights errant who helped the weak and punished the guilty during the Age of Chivalry.
erratic   ADJ.   odd;   unpredictable.   Investors  become anxious when the stock market appears erratic. erroneous   ADJ. mistaken; wrong. I thought my answer was correct, but it was erroneous.
erudite   ADJ.  learned;  scholarly. Though his fellow students thought him erudite, Paul knew he would have to spend many years in serious study before he could consider himself a scholar, erudition, N.
escapade N. prank; flighty conduct. The headmaster could not regard this latest escapade as a boyish joke and expelled the young man.
eschew v. avoid. Hoping to present himself .to his girlfriend as a totally reformed character, he tried to eschew all the vices, especially chewing tobacco and drinking bathtub gin. 
esoteric    ADJ. hard to understand; known only to the chosen few. New Yorker short stories often include esoteric allusions to obscure people and events. The implication is, if you are in the in-crowd, you'll get the reference; if you come from Cleveland, you won't, esoterica, N.
espionage N. spying. In order to maintain its power, the government developed a system of espionage that penetrated every household.
espouse v. adopt; support. She was always ready to espouse a worthy cause.
esteem v. respect; value. Jill esteemed Jack's taste in music, but she deplored his taste in clothes, also N.
estranged ADJ. separated; alienated. The estranged wife sought a divorce, estrangement, N.
ethereal ADJ. light; heavenly; unusually refined. In Shakespeare's The Tempest, the spirit Ariel is an ethereal creature, too airy and unearthly for our mortal world.
ethnic ADJ. relating to races. Intolerance between ethnic groups is deplorable and usually is based on lack of information.
ethnology N. study of humankind. Sociology is one aspect of the science of ethnology.
ethos N. underlying character of a culture, group, etc. Seeing how tenderly Spaniards treated her small daughter made author Barbara Kingsolver aware of how greatly children were valued in the Spanish ethos.
etymology N. study of word parts. A knowledge of etymology can help you on many English tests: if you know what the roots and prefixes mean, you can determine the meanings of unfamiliar words.
eugenic ADJ. pertaining to the improvement of race. It is easier to apply eugenic principles to the raising of racehorses or prize cattle than to the development of human beings.
eulogistic ADJ. praising. To everyone's surprise, the speech was eulogistic rather than critical in tone.
eulogy   N. expression of praise, often on the occasion of someone's death.  Instead of delivering a spoken eulogy at Genny's memorial service, Jeff sang a song he had written in her honor, eulogize, v.
euphemism   N. mild expression in place of an unpleasant one. The expression "he passed away" is a euphemism for "he died."
euphony N. sweet sound. Noted for its euphony even when it is spoken, the Italian language is particularly pleasing to the ear when sung, euphonious, ADJ.
euphoria N. feeling of exaggerated (or unfounded) well-being. "Jill's been on cloud nine ever since Jack asked her out," said Betty, dismissing her friend's euphoria.
euthanasia N. mercy killing. Many people support euthanasia for terminally ill patients who wish to die.
evanescent ADJ. fleeting; vanishing. For a brief moment, the entire skyline was bathed in an orange-red hue in the evanescent rays of the sunset.
evasive ADJ. not frank; eluding. Your evasive answers convinced the judge that you were withholding important evidence, evade, v.
evince v. show clearly. When he tried to answer the questions, he evinced his ignorance of the subject matter.
evenhanded ADJ. impartial; fair. Do men and women receive evenhanded treatment from their teachers, or, as recent studies suggest, do teachers pay more attention to male students than to females?
evocative ADJ. tending to call up (emotions, memories). Scent can be remarkably evocative. The aroma of pipe tobacco evokes the memory of my father; a whiff of talcum powder calls up images of my daughter as a child.
evoke v. call forth. He evoked much criticism by his hostile manner, evocation, N.
ewe N. female sheep. The flock of sheep was made up of dozens of ewes, together with only a handful of rams.
exacerbate   v. worsen; embitter. The latest bombing exacerbated  England's  already  existing bitterness against the IRA, causing the Prime Minister to break off the peace talks abruptly, exacerbation, N.
exacting ADJ. extremely demanding. Cleaning the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel was an exacting task, one that demanded extremely meticulous care on the part of the restorers, exaction, N.
exalt v. raise in rank or dignity; praise. The actor Sean Connery was exalted to the rank of knighthood by the Queen; he now is known as Sir Sean Connery.
exasperate v. vex. Johnny often exasperates his mother with his pranks.
exceptionable ADJ. objectionable. Do you find the punk rock band Green Day a highly exceptionable, thoroughly distasteful group, or do you think they are exceptionally talented performers?
excerpt N. selected passage (written or musical). The cinematic equivalent of an excerpt from a novel is a clip from a film, also v.
exchequer N. treasury. He had been Chancellor of the Exchequer before his promotion to the office he now holds.
excise v. cut away; cut out. When you excise the dead and dying limbs of a tree, you not only improve its appearance but also enhance its chances of bearing fruit, excision, N.
exclaim v. cry out suddenly. "Watson! Behind you!" Holmes exclaimed, seeing the assassin hurl himself on his friend, exclamation, N. exclamatory, ADJ.
excoriate v. scold with biting harshness; strip the skin off. Seeing the rips in Bill's new pants, his mother furiously excoriated him for ruining his good clothes. The tight, starched collar chafed and excoriated his neck, rubbing it raw.
exculpate v. clear from blame. She was exculpated of the crime when the real criminal confessed.
execrable ADJ. very bad. The anecdote was in such execrable taste that the audience was revolted.
execrate v. curse; express abhorrence for. The world execrates the memory of Hitler and hopes that genocide will never again be the policy of any nation.
execute v. put into effect; carry out. The choreographer wanted to see how well she could execute a pirouette, (secondary meaning) execution, N.
exegesis N. explanation, especially of biblical passages. I can follow your exegesis of this passage to a limited degree; some of your reasoning eludes me.
exemplary ADJ. serving as a model; outstanding. At commencement the dean praised Ellen for her exemplary behavior as class president.
exemplify v. show by example; furnish an example. Three-time winner of the Super Bowl, Joe Montana exemplifies the ideal quarterback.
exempt ADJ. not subject to a duty or obligation. Because of his flat feet, Foster was exempt from serving in the armed forces, also v.
exertion N. effort; expenditure of much physical work. The exertion involved in unscrewing the rusty bolt left her exhausted.
exhilarating ADJ. invigorating and refreshing; cheering. Though some of the hikers found tramping through the snow tiring, Jeffrey found the walk on the cold, crisp day exhilarating. His exhilaration was so great that, at the hike's end, he wanted to walk another five miles.
exhort v. urge. The evangelist exhorted all the sinners in the audience to reform, exhortation, N.
exhume v. dig out of the ground; remove from the grave. Could evidence that might identify the serial killer have been buried with his victim? To answer this question, the police asked the authorities for permission to exhume the victim's body,
exigency N. urgent situation. In this exigency, we must look for aid from our allies, exigent, ADJ.
exiguous ADJ. small; minute. Grass grew here and there, an exiguous outcropping among the rocks.
existential ADJ. pertaining to existence; pertaining to the philosophy of existentialism. To the existential philosopher, human reason is inadequate to explain an irrational, meaningless universe.
exodus N. departure. The exodus from the hot and stuffy city was particularly noticeable on Friday evenings.
exonerate v. acquit; exculpate. The defense team feverishly sought fresh evidence that might exonerate their client.
exorbitant ADJ. excessive. The people grumbled at his exorbitant prices but paid them because he had a monopoly.
exorcise v. drive out evil spirits. By incantation and prayer, the medicine man sought to exorcise the evil spirits that had taken possession of the young warrior.
exotic ADJ. not native; strange. Because of his exotic headdress, he was followed in the .streets by small children who laughed at his strange appearance.
expansive ADJ. outgoing and sociable; broad and extensive; able to increase in size. Mr. Fezziwig was in an expansive humor, cheerfully urging his guests to join in the Christmas feast. Looking down on his expansive paunch, he sighed: if his belly expanded any further, he'd need an expansive waistline for his pants.
expatiate v. talk at length. At this time, please give us a brief resume of your work; we shall permit you to expatiate later.
expatriate N. exile; someone who has withdrawn from his native land. Henry James was an American expatriate who settled in England.
expedient   ADJ. suitable; practical; politic. A pragmatic politician,  she was  guided  by what was  expedient ' rather than by what was ethical, expediency, N.
expedite v. hasten. Because we are on a tight schedule, we hope you will be able to expedite the delivery of our order. The more expeditious your response is, the happier we'll be.
expenditure N. payment or expense; output. When you are operating on an expense account, you must keep receipts for all your expenditures. If you don't save your receipts, you won't get repaid without the expenditure of a lot of energy arguing with the firm's accountants.
expertise N. specialized knowledge; expert skill. Although she was knowledgeable in a number of fields, she was hired for her particular expertise in computer programming.
expiate v. make amends for (a sin). He tried to expiate his crimes by a full confession to the authorities.
expletive N. interjection; profane oath. The sergeant's remarks were filled with expletives that offended the new recruits.
explicate v. explain; interpret; clarify. Harry Levin explicated James Joyce's novels with such clarity that even Finnegan's Wake seemed comprehensible to his students.
explicit ADJ. totally clear; definite; outspoken. Don't just hint around that you're dissatisfied: be explicit about what's bugging you.
exploit N. deed or action, particularly a brave deed. Raoul Wallenberg was noted for his exploits in rescuing Jews from Hitler's forces.
exploit v. make use of, sometimes unjustly. Cesar Chavez fought attempts to exploit migrant farmworkers in California, exploitation, N.
expository ADJ. explanatory; serving to explain. The manual that came with my VCR was no masterpiece of expository prose: its explanations were so garbled that I couldn't even figure out how to rewind a tape.
expostulation N. protest; remonstrance. Despite the teacher's scolding’s and expostulations, the class remained unruly.
exposure N. risk, particularly of being exposed to disease or to the elements; unmasking; act of laying something open. Exposure to sun and wind had dried out her hair and weathered her face. She looked so changed that she no longer feared exposure as the notorious Irene Adler, one-time antagonist of Sherlock Holmes.
expropriate v. take possession of. He questioned the government's right to expropriate his land to create a wildlife preserve.
expunge v. cancel; remove. If you behave, I will expunge this notation from your record.
expurgate v. clean; remove offensive parts of a book. The editors felt that certain passages in the book had to be expurgated before it could be used in the classroom.
extant ADJ. still in existence. Although the book is out of print, some copies are still extant. Unfortunately, all of them are in libraries or private collections; none is for sale.
extemporaneous ADJ. not planned; impromptu. Because her extemporaneous remarks were misinterpreted, she decided to write all her speeches in advance.
extenuate v. weaken; mitigate. It is easier for us to extenuate our own shortcomings than those of others.
extirpate v. root up. The Salem witch trials were a misguided attempt to extirpate superstition and heresy.
extol v. praise; glorify. The president extolled the astronauts, calling them the pioneers of the Space Age.
extort v. wring from; get money by threats, etc. The blackmailer extorted money from his victim.
extradition N. surrender of prisoner by one state to another. The lawyers opposed the extradition of their client on the grounds that for more than five years he had been a model citizen.
extraneous ADJ. not essential; superfluous. No wonder Ted can't think straight! His mind is so cluttered up with extraneous details, he can't concentrate on the essentials.
extrapolation N. projection; conjecture. Based on their extrapolation from the results of the primaries on Super Tuesday, the networks predicted that George W. Bush would be the Republican candidate for the presidency, extrapolate, v.
extricate v. free; disentangle. Icebreakers were needed to extricate the trapped whales from the icy floes that closed them in.
extrinsic ADJ. external; not essential; extraneous. A critically acclaimed extrinsic feature of the Chrysler Building is its ornate spire. The judge would not admit the testimony, ruling that it was extrinsic to the matter at hand.
extrovert N. person interested mostly in external objects and actions. A good salesperson is usually an extrovert who likes to mingle with people.
extrude v. force or push out. Much pressure is required to extrude these plastics.
exuberance N. overflowing abundance; joyful enthusiasm; flamboyance; lavishness. I was bowled over by the exuberance of Amy's welcome. Cheeks glowing, she was the picture of exuberant good health.
exude v. discharge; give forth. The maple syrup is obtained from the sap that the trees exude in early spring, exudation, N.
exult   v. rejoice. We exulted when our team won the victory.
