fabricate v. build; lie. If we fabricate the buildings in this project out of standardized sections, we can reduce construction costs considerably. Because of Jack's tendency to fabricate, Jill had trouble believing a word he said.
facade N. front (of building); superficial or false appearance. The ornate facade of the church was often photographed by tourists, who never bothered to walk around the building to view its other sides. Cher's outward show of confidence was just a facade she assumed to hide her insecurity.
facet N. small plane surface (of a gem); a side. The stonecutter decided to improve the rough diamond by providing it with several facets.
facetious   ADJ. joking (often inappropriately); humorous. I'm serious about this project; I don't need any facetious, smart-alecky cracks about do-good little rich girls.
facile ADJ. easily accomplished; ready or fluent; superficial. Words came easily to Jonathan: he was a facile speaker and prided himself on being ready to make a speech at a moment's notice, facility, N.
facilitate   v. help bring about; make less difficult. Rest and proper nourishment should facilitate the patient's recovery.
facsimile N. copy. Many museums sell facsimiles of the works of art on display.
faction N. party; clique; dissension. The quarrels and bickering of the two small factions within the club disturbed the majority of the members.
factious ADJ. inclined to form factions; causing dissension. Your statement is factious and will upset the harmony that now exists.
factitious ADJ. artificial; sham. Hollywood actresses often create factitious tears by using glycerin.
factotum N. handyman; person who does all kinds of work. Although we had hired him as a messenger, we soon began to use him as a general factotum around the office.
faculty N. mental or bodily powers; teaching staff. As he grew old, Professor Twiggly feared he might lose his faculties and become unfit to teach. However, while he was in full possession of his faculties, the school couldn't kick him off the faculty.
fallacious   ADJ. false; misleading. Paradoxically, fallacious  reasoning   does   not  always   yield   erroneous results: even though your logic may be faulty, the answer you get may be correct, fallacy, N.
fallible ADJ. liable to err. I know I am fallible, but I feel confident that I am right this time.
fallow ADJ. plowed but not sowed; uncultivated. Farmers have learned that it is advisable to permit land to lie fallow every few years.
falter v. hesitate. When told to dive off the high board, she did not falter, but proceeded at once.
fanaticism N. excessive zeal; extreme devotion to a belief or cause. When Islamic fundamentalists demanded the death of Salman Rushdie because his novel questioned their faith, world opinion condemned them for their fanaticism, fanatic, ADJ., N.
fancied ADJ. imagined; unreal. You are resenting fancied insults. No one has ever said such things about you.
fancier N. breeder or dealer of animals. The dog fancier exhibited her prize collie at the annual Kennel Club show.
fanciful ADJ. whimsical; visionary. This is a fanciful scheme because it does not consider the facts.
fanfare N. call by bugles or trumpets; showy display. The exposition was opened with a fanfare of trumpets and the firing of cannon.
farce N. broad comedy; mockery. Nothing went right; the entire interview degenerated into a farce, farcical, ADJ.
fastidious ADJ. difficult to please; squeamish. Bobby was such a fastidious eater that he would eat a sandwich only if his mother first cut off every scrap of crust.
fatalism N. belief that events are determined by forces beyond one's control. With fatalism, he accepted the hardships that beset him. fatalistic, ADJ.
fathom v. comprehend; investigate. I find his motives impossible to fathom; in fact, I'm totally clueless about what goes on in his mind.
fatuous   ADJ. foolish; inane. She is far too intelligent to utter such fatuous remarks.
fauna N. animals of a period or region. The scientist could visualize the fauna of the period by examining the skeletal remains and the fossils.
fawning   ADJ. courting favor by cringing and flattering. She was constantly surrounded by a group of fawning admirers who hoped to win some favor, fawn, v.
faze v. disconcert; dismay. No crisis could faze the resourceful hotel manager.
feasible ADJ. practical. Is it feasible to build a new stadium for the Yankees on New York's West Side? Without additional funding, the project is clearly unrealistic.
febrile ADJ. feverish. In his febrile condition, he was subject to nightmares and hallucinations.
fecundity N. fertility; fruitfulness. The fecundity of her mind is illustrated by the many vivid images in her poems.
feign v. pretend. Lady Macbeth feigned illness in the courtyard although she was actually healthy.
feint N. trick; shift; sham blow. The boxer was fooled by his opponent's feint and dropped his guard, also v.
felicitous   ADJ. apt; suitably expressed; well chosen. He was famous for his felicitous remarks and was called upon  to  serve  as  master-of-ceremonies  at  many a banquet.
felicity N. happiness; appropriateness (of a remark, choice, etc.). She wrote a note to the newlyweds wishing them great felicity in their wedded life.
fell   ADJ.  cruel;  deadly.  The  newspapers told of the tragic spread of the fell disease.
fell   v. cut or knock down; bring down (with a missile). Crying "Timber!" Paul Bunyan felled the mighty redwood tree. Robin Hood loosed his arrow and felled the king's deer.
felon N. person convicted of a grave crime. A convicted felon loses the right to vote.
feral ADJ. not domestic; wild. Abandoned by their owners, dogs may revert to their feral state, roaming the woods in packs.
ferment N. agitation; commotion. With the breakup of the Soviet Union, much of Eastern Europe was in a state of ferment, also v.
ferret v. drive or hunt out of hiding. She ferreted out their secret.
fervent ADJ. ardent; hot. She felt that the fervent praise was excessive and somewhat undeserved.
fervid ADJ. ardent. Her fervid enthusiasm inspired all of us to undertake the dangerous mission.
fervor   N. glowing ardor; intensity of feeling. At the protest rally, the students cheered the strikers and booed the dean with equal fervor.
fester   v. rankle; produce irritation or resentment. Joe's insult festered in Anne's mind for days, and made her too angry to speak to him.
festive   ADJ. joyous; celebratory. Their wedding in the park was a festive occasion.
fete   v. honor at a festival. The returning hero was feted at a community supper and dance, also N.
fetid ADJ. malodorous. The neglected wound became fetid.
fetter   v. shackle. The prisoner was fettered to the wall.
fiasco N. total failure. Our ambitious venture ended in a fiasco and we were forced to flee.
fiat N. command. I cannot accept government by fiat; I feel that the wishes of the citizens must be consulted.
fickle ADJ. changeable; faithless. As soon as Romeo saw Juliet, he forgot all about his old girlfriend Rosaline. Was Romeo fickle?
fictitious ADJ. imaginary. Although this book purports to be a biography of George Washington, many of the incidents are fictitious.
fidelity N. loyalty. A dog's fidelity to its owner is one of the reasons why that animal is a favorite household pet.
figment N. invention; imaginary thing. That incident never took place; it is a figment of your imagination.
figurative ADJ. not literal, but metaphorical; using a figure of speech. "To lose one's marbles" is a figurative expression; if you're told Jack has lost his marbles, no one expects you to rush out to buy him a replacement set.
figurine N. small ornamental statuette. In The Maltese Falcon, Sam Spade was hired to trace the missing figurine of a black bird.
filch   v. steal. The boys filched apples from the fruit stand.
filial ADJ. pertaining to a son or daughter. Many children forget their filial obligations and disregard the wishes of their parents.
filibuster v. block legislation by making long speeches. Even though we disapproved of Senator Foghorn's political goals, we were impressed by his ability to filibuster endlessly to keep an issue from coming to a vote.
filigree N. delicate, lacelike metalwork. The pendant with gold filigree that she wore round her neck trembled with each breath she took.
filing N. particle removed by a file. As the prisoner filed away at the iron bar on the cell window, a small heap of filings accumulated on the window sill.
finale N. conclusion. It is not until we reach the finale of this play that we can understand the author's message.
finesse N. delicate skill. The finesse and adroitness of the surgeon impressed the observers in the operating room.
finicky ADJ. too particular; fussy. The little girl was finicky about her food, leaving anything that wasn't to her taste.
finite ADJ. limited. It is difficult for humanity with its finite existence to grasp the infinite.
firebrand N. hothead; troublemaker. The police tried to keep track of all the local firebrands when the president came to town.
fissure N. crevice. The mountain climbers secured footholds in tiny fissures in the rock.
fitful ADJ. spasmodic; intermittent. After several fitful attempts, he decided to postpone the start of the project until he felt more energetic.
flaccid ADJ. flabby. His sedentary life had left him with flaccid muscles.
flag   v. droop; grow feeble. When the opposing hockey, team scored its third goal only minutes into the first period, the home team's spirits flagged, flagging, ADJ.
flagrant ADJ. conspicuously wicked; blatant; outrageous. The governor's appointment of his brother-in-law to the state Supreme Court was a flagrant violation of the state laws against nepotism (favoritism based on kinship).
flail v. thresh grain by hand; strike or slap; toss about. In medieval times, warriors flailed their foe with a metal ball attached to a handle.
flair N. talent. She has an uncanny flair tor discovering new artists before the public has become aware of their existence.
flamboyant ADJ. ornate. Modern architecture has discarded the flamboyant trimming on buildings and emphasizes simplicity of line.
flaunt v. to parade or display oneself conspicuously; defiantly, or boldly. He was expelled for flaunting military regulations.
flay v. strip off skin; plunder. The criminal was condemned to be flayed alive.
fleck v. spot. Her cheeks, flecked with tears, were testimony to the hours of weeping.
fledgling   ADJ. inexperienced. While it is necessary to provide these fledgling poets with an opportunity to present their work, it is not essential that we admire everything they write, also N.
fleece N. wool coat of a sheep. They shear sheep of their fleece, which they then comb into separate strands of wool.
fleece v. rob; plunder. The tricksters fleeced him of his inheritance.
flick N. light stroke as with a whip. The horse needed no encouragement; only one flick of the whip was all the jockey had to apply to get the animal to run at top speed.
flinch v. hesitate; shrink. She did not flinch in the face of danger but fought back bravely.
flippant ADJ. lacking proper seriousness. When Mark told Mona he loved her, she dismissed his earnest declaration with a flippant "Oh, you say that to all the girls!" flippancy, N.
flit v. fly; dart lightly; pass swiftly by. Like a bee flitting from flower to flower, Rose flitted from one boyfriend to the next.
floe N. mass of floating ice. The ship made slow progress as it battered its way through the ice floes.
flora N. plants of a region or era. Because she was a botanist, she spent most of her time studying the flora of the desert.
florid ADJ. ruddy; reddish; flowery. If you go to Florida and get a sunburn, your complexion will look florid. If your postcards about your trip praise it in flowery words, your prose will be florid, too.
flotsam N. drifting wreckage. Beachcombers eke out a living by salvaging the flotsam and jetsam of the sea.
flounder   v. struggle and thrash about; proceed clumsily or falter. Up to his knees in the bog, Floyd floundered about, trying to regain his footing. Bewildered by the new software, Flo floundered until Jan showed her how to get started.
flourish   v. grow well; prosper; make sweeping gestures. The orange trees flourished in the sun.
flout   v. reject; mock. The headstrong youth flouted all authority; he refused to be curbed.
fluctuate   v.  waver;  shift.  The water  pressure  in  our shower fluctuates wildly; you start rinsing yourself off with a trickle, and two minutes later a blast of water nearly knocks you off your feet. I'll never get used to these fluctuations.
fluency   N. smoothness of speech. She spoke French with fluency and ease.
fluke N. unlikely occurrence; stroke of fortune. When Douglas defeated Tyson for the heavyweight championship, some sportscasters dismissed his victory as a fluke.
fluster v. confuse. The teacher's sudden question flustered him and he stammered his reply.
fluted ADJ. having vertical parallel grooves (as in a pillar). All that remained of the ancient building were the fluted columns.
flux N. flowing; series of changes. While conditions are in such a state of flux, I do not wish to commit myself too deeply in this affair.
fodder N. coarse food for cattle, horses, etc. One of Nancy's chores at the ranch was to put fresh supplies of foddering the horses' stalls.
foible N. weakness; slight fault. We can overlook the foibles of our friends; no one is perfect.
foil N. contrast. In Star Wars, dark, evil Darth Vader is a perfect foil for fair-haired, naive Luke Skywalker.
foil v. defeat; frustrate. In the end, Skywalker is able to foil Vader's diabolical schemes.
foist v. insert improperly; palm off. I will not permit you to foist such ridiculous ideas upon the membership of this group.
foliage N. masses of leaves. Every autumn before the leaves fell he promised himself he would drive through New England to admire the colorful fall foliage.
foment v. stir up; instigate. Cher's archenemy Heather spread some nasty rumors that fomented trouble in the club. Do you think Cher's foe meant to foment such discord?
foolhardy ADJ. rash. Don't be foolhardy. Get the advice of experienced people before undertaking this venture.
foppish ADJ. vain about dress and appearance. He tried to imitate the foppish manner of the young men of the court.
foray N. raid. The company staged a midnight foray against the enemy outpost.
forbearance N. patience. We must use forbearance in dealing with him because he is still weak from his illness.
ford N. place where a river can be crossed on foot. Rather than risk using the shaky rope bridge, David walked a half-mile downstream until he came to the nearest ford, also v.
forebears N. ancestors. Reverence for one's forebears (sometimes referred to as ancestor worship) plays an important part in many Oriental cultures.
foreboding N. premonition of evil. Suspecting no conspiracies against him, Caesar gently ridiculed his wife's forebodings about the Ides of March.
forensic ADJ. suitable to debate or courts of law. In her best forensic manner, the lawyer addressed the jury.
foreshadow v. give an indication beforehand; portend; prefigure. In retrospect, political analysts realized that Yeltsin's defiance of the attempted coup foreshadowed his emergence as the dominant figure of the new Russian republic.
foresight N. ability to foresee future happenings; prudence. A wise investor, she had the foresight to buy land just before the current real estate boom.
forestall v. prevent by taking action in advance. By setting up a prenuptial agreement, the prospective bride and groom hoped to forestall any potential arguments about money in the event of a divorce.
forgo v. give up; do without. Determined to lose weight for the summer, Ida decided to Red Velvet dessert until she could fit into a size eight again.
forlorn ADJ. sad and lonely; wretched. Deserted by her big sisters and her friends, the forlorn child sat sadly on the steps awaiting their return.
formality N. ceremonious quality; something done just for form's sake. The president received the visiting heads of state with due formality: flags waving, honor guards standing at attention, bands playing anthems at full blast. Signing this petition is a mere formality; it does not obligate you in any way.
formidable ADJ. menacing; threatening. We must not treat the battle lightly for we are facing a formidable foe.
forsake v. desert; abandon; renounce. No one expected Foster to forsake his wife and children and run off with another woman.
forswear v. renounce; abandon. The captured knight could escape death only if he agreed to forswear Christianity and embrace Islam as the one true faith.
forte N. strong point or special talent. I am not eager to play this rather serious role, for my forte is comedy.
forthright ADJ. straightforward; direct; frank. I prefer Jill's forthright approach to Jack's tendency to beat around the bush.
fortitude N. bravery; courage. He was awarded the medal for his fortitude in the battle.
fortuitous ADJ. accidental; by chance. Though he pretended their encounter was fortuitous, he'd actually been hanging around her usual haunts for the past two weeks, hoping she'd turn up.
foster v. rear; encourage. According to the legend, Romulus and Remus were fostered by a she-wolf that raised the abandoned infants as her own. also ADJ.
founder v. fail completely; sink. After hitting the submerged iceberg, the Titanic started taking in water rapidly and soon foundered.
founder N. person who establishes (an organization, business). Among those drowned when the Titanic sank was the founder of the Abraham & Straus chain.
fracas N. brawl, melee. The military police stopped the fracas in the bar and arrested the belligerents.
fractious ADJ. unruly. The fractious horse unseated its rider.
frail ADJ. weak. The delicate child seemed too fra;7to lift the heavy carton, frailty, N.
franchise N. right granted by authority; right to vote; license to sell a product in a particular territory. The city issued a franchise to the company to operate surface transit lines on the streets for 99 years. For most of American history women lacked the right to vote: not until the early twentieth century was the franchise granted to women. Stan owns a Carvel's ice cream franchise in Chinatown.
frantic ADJ. wild. At the time of the collision, many people became frantic with fear.
fraudulent ADJ. cheating; deceitful. The government seeks to prevent fraudulent and misleading advertising.
fraught ADJ. filled. Since this enterprise is fraught with danger, I will ask for volunteers who are willing to assume the risks.
fray N. brawl. The three musketeers were in the thick of the fray.
frenetic ADJ. frenzied; frantic. His frenetic activities convinced us that he had no organized plan of operation.
frenzied ADJ. madly excited. As soon as they smelled smoke, the frenzied animals milled about in their cages.
fresco N. painting on plaster (usually fresh). The cathedral is visited by many tourists who wish to admire the frescoes by Giotto.
fret v. be annoyed or vexed. To fret over your poor grades is foolish; instead, decide to work harder in the future.
friction N. clash in opinion; rubbing against. At this time when harmony is essential, we cannot afford to have any friction in our group.
frieze N. ornamental band on a wall. The frieze of the church was adorned with sculpture.
frigid   ADJ. intensely cold. Alaska is in the frigid zone.
fritter v. waste. He could not apply himself to any task and frittered away his time in idle conversation.
frivolous ADJ. lacking in seriousness; self-indulgently care free; relatively unimportant. Though Nancy enjoyed Bill's frivolous, lighthearted companionship, she sometimes wondered whether he could ever be serious, frivolity, N.
frolicsome ADJ. prankish; gay. The frolicsome puppy tried to lick the face of its master.
frond N. fern leaf; palm or banana leaf. After the storm the beach was littered with the fronds of palm trees.
fructify v. bear fruit. This peach tree should fructify in three years.
frugality N. thrift; economy. In these economically difficult days businesses must practice frugality or risk bankruptcy, frugal, ADJ.
fruition N. bearing of fruit; fulfillment; realization. This building marks the fruition of all our aspirations and years of hard work.
frustrate   v.  thwart;   defeat.  We  must  frustrate this dictator's plan to seize control of the government, fugitive    ADJ.  fleeting  or transitory;   roving.  The  film brought a few  fugitive images to  her mind,  but on the whole it made no lasting impression upon her.
fulcrum N. support on which a lever rests. If we use this stone as a fulcrum and the crowbar as a lever, we may be able to move this boulder.
fulminate v. thunder; explode. The people against whom she fulminated were innocent of any wrongdoing.
fulsome ADJ. disgustingly excessive. His fulsome praise of the dictator annoyed his listeners.
functionary N. official. As his case was transferred from one functionary to another, he began to despair of ever reaching a settlement.
fundamental v. basic; primary; essential. The committee discussed all sorts of side issues without ever getting down to addressing the fundamental problem.
funereal ADJ. sad; solemn. I fail to understand why there is such a funereal atmosphere; we have lost a battle,-not a war.
furor N. frenzy; great excitement. The story of her embezzlement of the funds created a furor on the stock exchange.
furtive ADJ. stealthy; sneaky. Noticing the furtive glance the customer gave the diamond bracelet on the counter, the jeweler wondered whether he had a potential shoplifter on his hands.
fusillade N. simultaneous firing or outburst (of missiles, questions, etc.). Tchaikovsky's 1812 Overture concludes with a thunderous fusillade of cannon fire.
fusion N. union; coalition. The opponents of the political party in power organized a fusion of disgruntled groups and became an important element in the election.
futile ADJ. useless; hopeless; ineffectual. It is futile for me to try to get any work done around here while the telephone is ringing every 30 seconds, futility, N.
