gadfly N. animal-biting fly; an irritating person. Like a gadfly, he irritated all the guests at the hotel; within forty-eight hours, everyone regarded him as an annoying busybody.
gaffe N. social blunder. According to Miss Manners, to call your husband by your lover's name is worse than a mere gaffe; it is a tactical mistake.
gainsay v. deny. She was too honest to gainsay the truth of the report.
gait N. manner of walking or running; speed. The lame man walked with an uneven gait.
galaxy N. large, isolated system of stars, such as the Milky Way; a collection of brilliant personalities. Science fiction speculates about the possible existence of life in other galaxies. The deaths of such famous actors as John Candy and George Burns tells us that the galaxy of Hollywood superstars is rapidly disappearing.
gale N. windstorm; gust of wind; emotional outburst (laughter, tears). The Weather Channel warned viewers about a rising gale, with winds of up to 60 miles per hour.
gall N. bitterness; nerve. The knowledge of his failure filled him with gall.
gall   v. annoy; chafe. Their taunts galled him.
galleon N. large sailing ship. The Spaniards pinned their hopes on the galleon, the large warship; the British, on the smaller and faster pinnace.
galvanize v. stimulate by shock; stir up; revitalize. News that the prince was almost at their door galvanized the ugly stepsisters into a frenzy of combing and primping.
gambit N. opening in chess in which a piece is sacrificed. The player was afraid to accept his opponent's gambit because he feared a trap that as yet he could not see.
gambol v. romp; skip about; leap playfully. Watching the children gambol in the park, Betty marveled at their youthful energy and zest, also N.
gamely ADV.- in a spirited manner; with courage. Because he had fought gamely against a much superior boxer, the crowd gave him a standing ovation when he left the arena.
gamut N. entire range. In this performance, the leading lady was able to demonstrate the complete gamut of her acting ability.
gape v. open widely. The huge pit gaped before him; if he stumbled, he would fall in. Slack-jawed in wonder, Huck gaped at the huge stalactites hanging from the ceiling of the limestone cavern.
garbled ADJ. mixed up; jumbled; distorted. A favorite party game involves passing a whispered message from one person to another; by the time it reaches the last player, the message has become totally garbled, garble, v.
gargantuan ADJ. huge; enormous. The gargantuan wrestler was terrified of mice.
gargoyle N. waterspout carved in grotesque figures on a building. The gargoyles adorning the Cathedral of Notre Dame in Paris are amusing in their grotesqueness.
garish ADJ. over bright in color; gaudy. She wore a rhinestone necklace with a garish red and gold dress trimmed with sequins.
garner v. gather; store up. She hoped to garner the world's literature in one library.
garnish v. decorate. Parsley was used to garnish the boiled potato, also N.
garrulous ADJ. loquacious; wordy; talkative. My Uncle Henry can out-talk any other three people I know. He is the most garrulous person in Cayuga County, garrulity, N.
gastronomy N. science of preparing and serving good food. One of the by-products of his trip to Europe was his interest in gastronomy; he enjoyed preparing and serving foreign dishes to his friends.
gauche ADJ. clumsy; coarse and uncouth. Compared to the sophisticated young ladies in their elegant gowns, tomboyish Jo felt gauche and out of place.
gaudy ADJ. flashy; showy. The newest Trump skyscraper is typically gaudy, covered in gilded panels that gleam in the sun.
gaunt ADJ. lean and angular; barren. His once-round face looked surprisingly gaunt after he had lost weight.
gavel N. hammerlike tool; mallet. "Sold!" cried the auctioneer, banging her gavel on the table to indicate she'd accepted the final bid. also v.
gawk v. stare foolishly; look in open-mouthed awe. The country boy gawked at the skyscrapers and neon lights of the big city.
gazette N. official periodical publication. He read the gazettes regularly for the announcement of his promotion.
genealogy N. record of descent; lineage. He was proud of his genealogy and constantly referred to the achievements of his ancestors.
generality N. vague statement. This report is filled with generalities; you must be more specific in your statements.
generate v. cause; produce; create. In his first days in office, President Clinton managed to generate a new mood of optimism; we hoped he could also generate a few new jobs.
generic ADJ. characteristic of an entire class or species. Sue knew so many computer programmers who spent their spare time playing fantasy games that she began to think that playing Dungeons & Dragons was a generic trait.
genesis N. beginning; origin. Tracing the genesis of a family is the theme of "Roots."
geniality N. cheerfulness; kindliness; sympathy. This restaurant is famous and popular because of the geniality of the proprietor, who tries to make everyone happy, genial, ADJ.
genre N. particular variety of art or literature. Both a short story writer and a poet, Langston Hughes proved himself equally skilled in either genre.
genteel ADJ. well-bred; elegant. We are looking for a man with a genteel appearance who can inspire confidence by his cultivated manner.
gentility N. those of gentle birth; refinement. Her family was proud of its gentility and elegance.
gouge v. tear out. In that fight, all the rules were forgotten; the adversaries bit, kicked, and tried to gouge each other's eyes out.
gouge   v. overcharge. During the World Series, ticket scalpers tried to gouge the public, asking astronomical prices even for bleacher seats.
gourmand N. epicure; person who takes excessive pleasure in food and drink. Gourmands lack self-restraint; if they enjoy a particular cuisine, they eat far too much of it.
gourmet N. connoisseur of food and drink. The gourmet stated that this was the best onion soup she had ever tasted.
graduated ADJ. arranged by degrees (of height, difficulty, etc.). Margaret loved her graduated set of Russian hollow wooden dolls; she spent hours happily putting the smaller dolls into their larger counterparts.
granary N. storehouse for grain. We have reason to be thankful, for our crops were good and our granaries are full.
grandeur N. impressiveness; stateliness; majesty. No matter how often he hiked through the mountains, David never failed to be struck by the grandeur of the Sierra Nevada range.
grandiloquent   ADJ. pompous; bombastic; using high sounding language. The politician could never speak simply; she was always grandiloquent,
grandiose ADJ. pretentious; high-flown; ridiculously exaggerated; impressive. The aged matinee idol still had grandiose notions of his supposed importance in the theatrical world.
granulate v. form into grains. Sugar that has been granulated dissolves more readily than lump sugar, granule, N.
graphic ADJ. pertaining to the art of delineating; vividly described. I was particularly impressed by the graphic presentation of the storm.
grapple v. wrestle; come to grips with. He grappled with the burglar and overpowered him.
grate v. make a harsh noise; have an unpleasant effect; shred. The screams of the quarreling children grated on her nerves.
gratify v. please. Lori's parents were gratified by her successful performance on the GRE.
gratis ADV. free. The company offered to give one package gratis to every purchaser of one of their products, also ADJ.
gratuitous ADJ. given freely; unwarranted; uncalled for. Quit making gratuitous comments about my driving; no one asked you for your opinion.
gratuity N. tip. Many service employees rely more on gratuities than on salaries for their livelihood.
gravity N. seriousness. We could tell we were in serious trouble from the gravity of her expression, grave, ADJ.
gregarious ADJ. sociable. Typically, party-throwers are gregarious; hermits are not.
grievance N. cause of complaint. When her supervisor ignored her complaint, she took her grievance to the union.
grill v. question severely. In violation of the Miranda law, the police grilled the suspect for several hours before reading him his rights, (secondary meaning)
grimace N. a facial distortion to show feeling such as pain, disgust, etc. Even though he remained silent, his grimace indicated his displeasure, also v.
grisly   ADJ. ghastly. She shuddered at the grisly sight.
grotesque ADJ. fantastic; comically hideous. On Halloween people enjoy wearing grotesque costumes.
grotto N. small cavern. The Blue Grotto in Capri can be entered only by small boats rowed by natives through a natural opening in the rocks.
grouse v. complain; fuss. Students traditionally grouse about the abysmal quality of "mystery meat" and similar dormitory food.
grovel v. crawl or creep on ground; remain prostrate. Even though we have been defeated, we do not have to grovel before our conquerors.
grudging ADJ. unwilling; reluctant; stingy. We received only grudging support from the mayor despite his earlier promises of aid.
gruel N. thin, liquid porridge. Our daily allotment of gruel made the meal not only monotonous but also unpalatable.
grueling ADJ. exhausting. The marathon is a grueling race.
gruesome ADJ. grisly; horrible. His face was the stuff of nightmares: all the children in the audience screamed when Freddy Kruger's gruesome countenance was flashed on the screen.
gruff ADJ. rough-mannered. Although he was blunt and gruff with most people, he was always gentle with children.
guffaw N. boisterous laughter. The loud guffaws that came from the closed room indicated that the members of the committee had not yet settled down to serious business, also v.
guile N. deceit; duplicity; wiliness; cunning, Lago uses considerable guile to trick Othello into believing that Desdemona has been unfaithful.
guileless   ADJ. without deceit. He is naive, simple, and guileless; he cannot be guilty of fraud.
guise N. appearance; costume. In the guise of a plumber, the detective investigated the murder case.
gull v. trick; hoodwink. Confident no one could gull him, Paul prided himself on his skeptical disposition.
gullible   ADJ. easily deceived. Gullible people have only themselves to blame if they fall for con artists repeatedly. As the saying goes, "Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me."
gustatory ADJ. affecting the sense of taste. The Thai restaurant offered an unusual gustatory experience for those used to a bland cuisine.
gusto N. enjoyment; enthusiasm. He accepted the assignment with such gusto that I feel he would have been satisfied with a smaller salary.
gusty ADJ. windy. The gusty weather made sailing precarious.
guy N. cable or chain attached to something that needs to be braced or steadied. If the guys holding up the mast on that derrick snap, the mast will topple.
gyroscope N. apparatus used to maintain balance, ascertain direction, etc. By using a rotating gyroscope, they were able to stabilize the vessel, counteracting the rolling movements of the sea.
