habituate v. accustom or familiarize; addict. Macbeth gradually habituated himself to murder, shedding his scruples as he grew accustomed to his bloody deeds.
hackles N. hairs on back and neck, especially of a dog. The dog's hackles rose and he began to growl as the sound of footsteps grew louder.
hackneyed ADJ. commonplace; trite. When the reviewer criticized the movie for its hackneyed plot, we agreed; we had seen similar stories hundreds of times before.
haggard ADJ. wasted away; gaunt. After his long illness, he was pale and haggard.
haggle v. argue about prices. I prefer to shop in a store that has a one-price policy because, whenever I haggle with a shopkeeper, I am never certain that I paid a fair price for the articles I purchased.
halcyon ADJ. calm; peaceful. In those halcyon days, people were not worried about sneak attacks and bombings.
hale   ADJ. healthy. After a brief illness, he was soon hale.
hallowed ADJ. blessed; consecrated. Although the dead girl's parents had never been active churchgoers, they insisted that their daughter be buried in hallowed ground.
hallucination N. delusion. I think you were frightened by a hallucination that you created in your own mind.
halting ADJ. hesitant; faltering. Novice extemporaneous speakers often talk in a halting fashion as they grope for the right words.
hamper v. obstruct. The new mother hadn't realized how much the effort of caring for an infant would hamper her ability to keep an immaculate house.
hap N. chance; luck. In his poem Hap, Thomas Hardy objects to the part chance plays in our lives, also v.
haphazard ADJ. random; by chance. His haphazard reading left him unacquainted with many classic books.
hapless ADJ. unfortunate. This hapless creature had never known a moment's pleasure.
harangue N. long, passionate, and vehement speech. In her lengthy harangue, the principal berated the offenders, also v.
harass v. annoy by repeated attacks. When he could not pay his bills as quickly as he had promised, he was harassed by his creditors.
harbinger N. forerunner. The crocus is an early harbinger of spring.
harbor v. provide a refuge for; hide. The church harbored illegal aliens who were political refugees, also N.
hardy ADJ. sturdy; robust; able to stand inclement weather. We asked the gardening expert to recommend particularly hardy plants that could withstand our harsh New England winters.
harping N. tiresome dwelling on a subject. After he had reminded me several times about what he had done for me I told him to stop his harping on my indebtedness to him. harp, v.
harrowing ADJ. agonizing; distressing; traumatic. At first Terry Anderson did not wish to discuss his harrowing months of captivity as a political hostage, harrow, v.
harry v. harass, annoy, torment; raid. The guerrilla band harried the enemy nightly.
hatch N. deck opening; lid covering a deck opening. The latch on the hatch failed to catch, so the hatch remained unlatched.
haughtiness N. pride; arrogance. When she realized that Darcy believed himself too good to dance with his inferiors, Elizabeth took great offense at his haughtiness.
haven N. place of safety; refuge. For Ricardo, the school library became his haven, a place to which he could retreat during chaotic times.
hazardous ADJ. dangerous. Your occupation is too hazardous for insurance companies to consider your application.
hazy ADJ. slightly obscure. In hazy weather, you cannot see the top of this mountain.
headlong ADJ. hasty; rash. The slave seized the unexpected chance to make a headlong dash across the border to freedom.
headstrong ADJ. stubborn; willful; unyielding. Because she refused to marry the man her parents had chosen for her, everyone scolded Minna and called her a foolish, headstrong girl.
heckler N. person who verbally harasses others. The heckler kept interrupting the speaker with rude remarks, heckle, v.
hedonist N. one who believes that pleasure is the sole aim in life. A thoroughgoing hedonist, he considered only his own pleasure and ignored any claims others had on his money or time, hedonism, N.
heedless ADJ. not noticing; disregarding. She drove on, heedless of the warnings that the road was dangerous, heed, v.
hegemony N. dominance, especially of one nation over others. As one Eastern European nation after another declared its independence, commentators marveled at the sudden breakdown of the once monolithic Soviet hegemony.
heinous ADJ. atrocious; hatefully bad. Hitler's heinous crimes will never be forgotten.
herbivorous ADJ. grain-eating. Some herbivorous animals have two stomachs for digesting their food.
heresy N. opinion contrary to popular belief; opinion contrary to accepted religion. Galileo's assertion that the earth moved around the sun directly contradicted the religious teachings of his day; as a result, he was tried for heresy, heretic, N. heretical, ADJ.
hermetic ADJ. sealed by fusion so as to be airtight. After you sterilize the bandages, place them in a container and seal it with a hermetic seal to protect them from contamination by airborne bacteria.
hermetic ADJ. obscure and mysterious; occult. It is strange to consider that modern chemistry originated in the hermetic teachings of the ancient alchemists, (secondary meaning)
hermitage N. home of a hermit. Even in his remote hermitage he could not escape completely from the world.
herpetologist N. one who studies reptiles. As a boy, Indiana Jones had a traumatic experience involving snakes; sensibly enough, he studied to be an archaeologist, not a herpetologist.
heterodox ADJ. unorthodox; unconventional. To those who upheld the belief that the earth did not move, Galileo's theory that the earth circled the sun was disturbingly heterodox.
heterogeneous ADJ. dissimilar; mixed. This year's entering class is a remarkably heterogeneous body: it includes students from 40 different states and 26 foreign countries, some the children of billionaires, others the offspring of welfare families, heterogeneity, N.
hew v. cut to pieces with ax or sword. The cavalry rushed into the melee and hewed the enemy with their swords, N.
heyday N. time of greatest success; prime. In their heyday, the San Francisco Forty-Niners won the Super Bowl two years running.
hiatus N. gap; pause. Except for a brief two-year hiatus, during which she enrolled in the Peace Corps, Ms. Clements has devoted herself to her medical career.
hibernal ADJ. wintry. Bears prepare for their long hibernal sleep by overeating.
hibernate v. sleep throughout the winter. Bears are one of the many species of animals that hibernate, hibernation, N.
hierarchy N. arrangement by rank or standing; authoritarian body divided into ranks. To be low man on the totem pole is to have an inferior place in the hierarchy. hierarchical, ADJ.
hieroglyphic N. picture writing. The discovery of the Rosetta Stone enabled scholars to read the ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics.
hilarity N. boisterous mirth. This hilarity is improper on this solemn day of mourning, hilarious, ADJ.
hindmost ADJ. furthest behind. The coward could always be found in the hindmost lines whenever a battle was being waged.
hindrance N. block; obstacle. Stalled cars along the highway are a hindrance to traffic that tow trucks should remove without delay, hinder, v.
hinterlands N. back country. They seldom had visitors, living as they did way out in the hinterlands.
hireling N. one who serves for hire (usually used contemptuously). In a matter of such importance, I do not wish to deal with hirelings: I must meet with the chief.
hirsute ADJ. hairy. He was a hirsute individual with a heavy black beard.
histrionic ADJ. theatrical. He was proud of his histrionic ability and wanted to play the role of Hamlet, histrionics, N.
hoard v. stockpile; accumulate for future use. Whenever there are rumors of a food shortage, people are tempted to hoard food, also N.
hoary ADJ. white with age. The man was hoary and wrinkled when he was 70.
hoax N. trick; practical joke. Embarrassed by the hoax, she reddened and left the room, also v.
holocaust N. destruction by fire. Citizens of San Francisco remember that the destruction of the city was caused not by the earthquake but by the holocaust that followed.
holster N. pistol case. Even when he was not in uniform, he carried a holster and pistol under his arm.
homage N. honor; tribute. In her speech she tried to pay homage to a great man.
homeostasis N. tendency of a system to maintain relative stability. A breakdown of the body's immune system severely undermines the body's ability to maintain homeostasis.
homespun ADJ. domestic; made at home. Homespun wit, like homespun cloth, was often coarse and plain.
homily N. sermon; serious warning. His speeches were always homilies, advising his listeners to repent and reform, homiletic, ADJ.
homogeneous ADJ. of the same kind. Because the student body at Elite Prep was so homogeneous, Sara and James decided to send their daughter to a school that offered greater cultural diversity, homogeneity, N.
hone v. sharpen. To make shaving easier, he honed his razor with great care.
hoodwink v. deceive; delude. Having been hoodwinked once by the fast-talking salesman, he was extremely cautious when he went to purchase a used car.
horde N. crowd. Just before Christmas the stores are filled with hordes of shoppers.
hortatory ADJ. encouraging; extortive. The crowd listened to his hortatory statements with ever-growing excitement; finally they rushed from the hall to carry out his suggestions.
horticultural ADJ. pertaining to cultivation of gardens. When he bought his house, he began to look for flowers and decorative shrubs, and began to read books dealing with horticultural matters.
hostility N. unfriendliness; hatred. A child who has been the sole object of his parents' affection often feels hostility toward a new baby in the family, resenting the newcomer who has taken his place, hostile, ADJ.
