illuminate v. brighten; clear up or make understandable; enlighten. Just as a lamp can illuminate a dark room, a perceptive comment can illuminate a knotty problem.
illusion N. misleading vision. It is easy to create an optical illusion in which lines of equal length appear different.
illusive ADJ. deceiving. This is only a mirage; let us not be fooled by its illusive effect.
illusory ADJ. deceptive; not real. Unfortunately, the costs of running the lemonade stand were so high that Tom's profits' proved illusory.
imbalance N. lack of balance or symmetry; disproportion. To correct racial imbalance in the schools, school boards have bused black children into white neighborhoods and white children into black ones.
imbecility N. weakness of mind. I am amazed at the imbecility of the readers of these trashy magazines.
imbibe   v. drink in. The dry soil imbibed the rain quickly.
imbroglio N. complicated situation; painful or complex misunderstanding; entanglement; confused mass (as of papers). The humor of Shakespearean comedies often depends on cases of mistaken identity that involve the perplexed' protagonists in one comic imbroglio after another, embroil, v.
imbue v. saturate, fill. His visits to the famous Gothic cathedrals imbued him with feelings of awe and reverence.
immaculate ADJ. spotless; flawless; absolutely clean. Ken and Jessica were wonderful tenants who left the apartment in immaculate condition when they moved out.
imminent ADJ. fear at hand; impending. Rosa was such a last-minute worker that she could never start writing a paper till the deadline was imminent,
immobility N. state of being immovable. Modern armies cannot afford the luxury of immobility, as they are vulnerable to attack while standing still.
immolate v. offer as a sacrifice. The tribal king offered to immolate his daughter to quiet the angry gods.
immune ADJ. resistant to; free or exempt from. Fortunately, Florence had contracted chicken pox as a child and was immune to it when her baby came down with spots, immunity, N.
immure v. imprison; shut up in confinement. For the two weeks before the examination, the student immured himself in his room and concentrated upon his studies.
immutable   ADJ. unchangeable. All things change over time; nothing is immutable.
impair   v. injure; hurt. Drinking alcohol can impair your ability to drive safely; if you're going to drink, don't drive.
impale v. pierce. He was impaled by the spear hurled by his adversary.
impalpable ADJ. imperceptible; intangible. The ash is so fine that it is impalpable to the touch but it can be seen as a fine layer covering the window ledge.
impartial ADJ. not biased; fair. Knowing she could not be impartial about her own child, Jo refused to judge any match in which Billy was competing, impartiality, N.
impassable ADJ. not able to be traveled or crossed. A giant redwood had fallen across the highway, blocking all four lanes: the road was impassable.
impasse N. predicament from which there is no escape. In this impasse, all turned to prayer as their last hope.
impassive   ADJ. without feeling; imperturbable; stoical. Refusing to let the enemy see how deeply shaken he was by his capture, the prisoner kept his face impassive.
impeach v. charge with crime in office; indict. The angry congressman wanted to impeach the president for his misdeeds.
impeccable ADJ. faultless. The uncrowned queen of the fashion industry, Diana was acclaimed for her impeccable taste.
impecunious ADJ. without money. Though Scrooge claimed he was too impecunious to give alms, he easily could have afforded to be charitable.
impede   v. hinder; block. The special prosecutor determined that the Attorney General, though inept, had not intentionally set  out to  impede the  progress  of the investigation.
impediment N. hindrance; stumbling-block. She had a speech impediment that prevented her from speaking clearly.
impel v. drive or force onward. A strong feeling of urgency impelled her; if she failed to finish the project right then, she knew that she would never get it done.
impending ADJ. nearing; approaching. The entire country was saddened by the news of his impending death.
impenetrable ADJ. not able to be pierced or entered; beyond understanding. How could the murderer have gotten into the locked room? To Watson, the mystery, like the room, was impenetrable.
impenitent ADJ. not repentant. We could see by his brazen attitude that he was impenitent,
imperative ADJ. absolutely necessary; critically important. It is imperative that you be extremely agreeable to Great-Aunt Maud when she comes to tea: otherwise she may not leave you that million dollars in her will, also N.
imperceptible ADJ. unnoticeable; undetectable. Fortunately, the stain on the blouse was imperceptible after the garment had gone through the wash.
imperial ADJ. like an emperor; related to an empire. When hotel owner Leona Helmsley appeared in ads as Queen Leona standing guard over the Palace Hotel, her critics mocked her imperial fancies.
imperious ADJ. domineering; haughty. Jane rather liked a man to be masterful, but Mr. Rochester seemed so bent on getting his own way that he was actually imperious! imperiousness, N.
impermeable   ADJ. impervious; not permitting passage through its substance. This new material is impermeable to liquids.
impertinent ADJ. insolent; rude. His neighbors' impertinent curiosity about his lack of dates angered Ted. It was downright rude of them to ask him such personal questions, impertinence, N.
imperturbable   ADJ. calm; placid. Wellington remained imperturbable and in full command of the situation in spite of the hysteria and panic all around him. imperturbability, N.
impervious   ADJ.  impenetrable;  incapable of being damaged  or  distressed.  The  carpet  salesman  told Simone that his most expensive brand of floor covering was warranted to be impervious to ordinary wear and tear. Having read so many negative reviews of his acting, the movie star had learned to ignore them, and was now impervious to criticism.
impetuous ADJ. violent; hasty; rash. "Leap before you look" was the motto suggested by one particularly impetuous young man.
impetus N. moving force; incentive; stimulus. A new federal highway program would create jobs and give added impetus to our economic recovery.
impiety N. irreverence; lack of respect for God. When members of the youth group draped the church in toilet paper one Halloween, the minister reprimanded them for their impiety, impious, ADJ.
impinge v. infringe; touch; collide with. How could they be married without impinging on one another's freedom?
impious ADJ. irreverent. The congregation was offended by her impious remarks.
implacable   ADJ. incapable of being pacified. Madame Defarge was the implacable enemy of the Evremonde family.
implausible ADJ. unlikely; unbelievable. Though her alibi seemed implausible, it in fact turned out to be true.
implement v. put into effect; supply with tools. The mayor was unwilling to implement the plan until she was sure it had the governor's backing, also N.
implicate v. incriminate; show to be involved. Here's the deal: if you agree to take the witness stand and implicate your partners in crime, the prosecution will recommend that the judge go easy in sentencing you.
implication N. something hinted at or suggested. When Miss Watson said she hadn't seen her purse since the last time Jim was in the house, the implication was that she suspected Jim had taken it.
implicit   ADJ. understood but not stated. Jack never told Jill he adored her; he believed his love was implicit in his deeds.
implode   v. burst inward. If you break a vacuum tube, the glass tube implodes, implosion, N.
implore   v. beg. He implored her to give him a second chance.
imply v. suggest a meaning not expressed; signify. When Aunt Millie said, "My! That's a big piece of pie, young man!" was she implying that Bobby was being a glutton in helping himself to such a huge piece?
impolitic ADJ. not wise. I think it is impolitic to raise this issue at the present time because the public is too angry.
imponderable ADJ. weightless. I can evaluate the data gathered in this study; the imponderable items are not so easily analyzed.
import   N. significance. I feel that you have not grasped . the full import of the message sent to us by the enemy.
importunate ADJ. urging; demanding. He tried to hide from his importunate creditors until his allowance arrived.
importune v. beg persistently. Democratic and Republican phone solicitors importuned her for contributions so frequently that she decided to give nothing to either party.
imposture N. assuming a false identity; masquerade. She was imprisoned for her imposture of a doctor.
impotent ADJ. weak; ineffective. Although he wished to break the nicotine habit, he found himself impotent in resisting the craving for a cigarette.
imprecation N. curse. Roused from bed at what he considered an ungodly hour, Roy muttered imprecations under his breath.
impregnable ADJ. invulnerable. Until the development of the airplane as a military weapon, the .fort was considered impregnable.
impromptu ADJ. without previous preparation; off the cuff; on the spur of the moment. The judges were amazed that she could make such a thorough, well-supported presentation in an impromptu speech.
impropriety N. improperness; unsuitableness. Because of the impropriety of the punk rocker's slashed T-shirt and jeans, the management refused to admit him to the hotel's very formal dining room.
improvident ADJ. thriftless. He was constantly being warned to mend his improvident ways and begin to "save for a rainy day." improvidence, N.
improvise v. compose on the spur of the moment. She would sit at the piano and improvise for hours on themes from Bach and Handel.
imprudent ADJ. lacking caution; injudicious. It is imprudent to exercise vigorously and become overheated when you are unwell.
impudence N. impertinence; insolence. Kissed on the cheek by a perfect stranger, Lady Catherine exclaimed, "Of all the nerve! Young man, I should have you horsewhipped for your impudence."
impugn v. dispute or contradict (often in an insulting way); challenge; gainsay. Our treasurer was furious when the finance committee's report impugned the accuracy of his financial records and recommended that he take bonehead math.
impuissance N. powerlessness; feebleness. The lame duck president was frustrated by his shift from enormous power to relative impuissance.
impunity N. freedom from punishment or harm. A 98-pound weakling can't attack a beachfront bully with impunity: the poor, puny guy is sure to get mashed.
impute v. attribute; ascribe. If I wished to impute blame to the officers in charge of this program, I would state my feelings definitely and immediately.
inadvertently ADV. unintentionally; by oversight; carelessly. Judy's great fear was that she might inadvertently omit a question on the exam and mismark her whole answer sheet.
inalienable ADJ. not to be taken away; nontransferable. The Declaration of Independence mentions the inalienable rights that all of us possess.
inane ADJ. silly; senseless. There's no point in what you're saying. Why are you bothering to make such inane remarks? inanity, N.
inanimate ADJ. lifeless. She was asked to identify the still and inanimate body.
inarticulate ADJ. speechless; producing indistinct speech. She became inarticulate with rage and uttered sounds without meaning.
inaugurate v. begin formally; install in office. The candidate promised that he would inaugurate a new nationwide health care plan as soon as he was inaugurated as president, inauguration, N.
incandescent ADJ. strikingly bright; shining with intense heat. If you leave on an incandescent light bulb, it quickly grows too hot to touch.
incantation N. singing or chanting of magic spells; magical formula. Uttering incantations to make the brew more potent, the witch doctor stirred the liquid in the caldron.
incapacitate v. disable. During the winter, many people were incapacitated by respiratory ailments.
incarcerate v. imprison. The civil rights workers were willing to be arrested and even incarcerated if by their imprisonment they could serve the cause.
incarnate ADJ. endowed with flesh; personified. Your attitude is so fiendish that you must be a devil incarnate.
incarnation N. act of assuming a human body and human nature. The incarnation of Jesus Christ is a basic tenet of Christian theology.
incendiary N. arsonist. The fire spread in such an unusual manner that the fire department chiefs were certain that it had been set by an incendiary, also ADJ.
incense v. enrage; infuriate. Cruelty to defenseless animals incensed Kit: the very idea brought tears of anger to her eyes.
incentive N. spur; motive. Mike's strong desire to outshine his big sister was all the incentive he needed to do well in school.
inception N. start; beginning. She was involved with the project from its inception.
incessant ADJ. uninterrupted; unceasing. In a famous TV commercial, the frogs' incessant croaking goes on and on until eventually it turns into a single word: "Budweiser."
inchoate ADJ. recently begun; rudimentary; elementary. Before the Creation, the world was an inchoate mass.
incidence N. rate of occurrence; particular occurrence. Health professionals expressed great concern over the high incidence of infant mortality in major urban areas.
incidental ADJ. not essential; minor. The scholarship covered his major expenses at college and some of his incidental expenses as well.
incipient ADJ. beginning; in an early stage. I will go to sleep early for I want to break an incipient cold.
incisive ADJ. cutting; sharp. Her incisive remarks made us see the fallacy in our plans, incision, N.
incite .v. arouse to action; goad; motivate; induce to exist. In a fiery speech, Mario incited his fellow students to go out on strike to protest the university's anti-affirmative-action stand.
inclement ADJ. stormy; unkind. In inclement weather, I like to curl up on the sofa with a good book and listen to the storm blowing outside.
incline N. slope; slant. The architect recommended that the nursing home's ramp be rebuilt because its incline was too steep for wheelchairs.
inclined ADJ. tending or leaning toward; bent. Though I am inclined to be skeptical, the witness's manner inclines me to believe his story, incline, v.
inclusive ADJ. tending to include all. The comedian turned down the invitation to join the Players' Club, saying any club that would let him in was too inclusive for him.
incognito ADV. with identity concealed; using an assumed name. The monarch enjoyed traveling through the town incognito and mingling with the populace, also ADJ.
incoherent ADJ. unintelligible; muddled; illogical. The excited fan blushed and stammered, her words becoming almost incoherent in the thrill of meeting her favorite rock star face to face, incoherence, N.
incommodious ADJ. not spacious; inconvenient. In their incommodious quarters, they had to improvise for closet space.
incompatible ADJ. inharmonious. The married couple argued incessantly and finally decided to separate because they were incompatible, incompatibility, N.
incongruity   N. lack of harmony; absurdity. The incongruity oi his wearing sneakers with formal attire amused the observers, incongruous, ADJ.
inconsequential   ADJ. insignificant; unimportant. Brushing off All's apologies for having broken the wine glass, Tamara said, "Don't worry about it; it's inconsequential."
inconsistency N. state of being self-contradictory; lack of uniformity or steadiness. How are lawyers different from agricultural inspectors? Where lawyers check inconsistencies in witnesses' statements, agricultural inspectors check inconsistencies in Grade A eggs, inconsistent, ADJ.
incontinent ADJ. lacking self-restraint; licentious. His incontinent behavior off stage so shocked many people that they refused to attend the plays and movies in which he appeared.
incontrovertible ADJ. indisputable; not open to question. Unless you find the evidence against my client absolutely incontrovertible, you must declare her not guilty of this charge.
incorporate v. introduce something into a larger whole; combine; unite. Breaking with precedent, President Truman ordered the military to incorporate blacks into every branch of the armed services, also ADJ.
incorporeal ADJ.- lacking a material body; insubstantial. Although Casper the friendly ghost is an incorporeal being, he and his fellow ghosts make quite an impact on the physical world.
incorrigible ADJ. uncorrectable. Though Widow Douglass hoped to reform Huck, Miss Watson pronounced him incorrigible and said he would come to no good end.
incredulity IM. tendency to disbelief. Your incredulity in the face of all the evidence is hard to understand.
incredulous ADJ. withholding belief; skeptical. When Jack claimed he hadn't eaten the jelly doughnut, Jill took an incredulous look at his smeared face and laughed.
increment N. increase. The new contract calls for a ten percent increment in salary for each employee for the next two years.
incriminate v. accuse; serve as evidence against. The witness's testimony against the racketeers incriminates some high public officials as well.
incrustation N. hard coating or crust. In dry dock, we scraped off the incrustation of dirt and barnacles that covered the hull of the ship.
incubate v. hatch. Inasmuch as our supply of electricity is cut off, we shall have to rely on the hens to incubate these eggs.
incubus N. burden; mental care; nightmare. The incubus of financial worry helped bring on her nervous breakdown.
inculcate v. teach. In an effort to inculcate religious devotion, the officials ordered that the school day begin with the singing of a hymn.
incumbent ADJ. obligatory; currently holding an office. It is incumbent upon all incumbent elected officials to keep accurate records of expenses incurred in office, also N.
incur v. bring upon oneself. His parents refused to pay any future debts he might incur.
incursion N. temporary invasion. The nightly incursions and hit-and-run raids of our neighbors across the border tried the patience of the country to the. point where we decided to retaliate in force,
indefatigable ADJ. tireless. Although the effort of taking out the garbage exhausted Wayne for the entire morning, when it came to partying, he was indefatigable.
indelible ADJ. not able to be erased. The indelible ink left a permanent mark on my shirt. Young Bill Clinton's meeting with President Kennedy made an indelible impression on the youth.
indemnify v. make secure against loss; compensate for loss. The city will indemnify all home owners whose property is spoiled by this project.
indentation N. notch; deep recess. You can tell one tree from another by noting the differences in the indentations along the edges of the leaves, indent, v.
indenture v. bind as servant or apprentice to master. Many immigrants could come to America only after they had indentured themselves for several years, also N.
indeterminate   ADJ. uncertain; not clearly fixed; indefinite. That interest rates shall rise appears certain; when they will do so, however, remains indeterminate.
indicative ADJ. suggestive; implying. A lack of appetite may be indicative of a major mental or physical disorder.
indices N. PL. signs; indications. Many college admissions officers believe that SAT scores and high school grades are the best indices of a student's potential to succeed in college, index, N. SING.
indict v. charge. The district attorney didn't want to indict the suspect until she was sure she had a strong enough case to convince a jury, indictment, N.
indifferent ADJ. unmoved or unconcerned by; mediocre. Because Ann felt no desire to marry, she was indifferent to Carl's constant proposals. Not only was she indifferent to him personally, but she felt that, given his general inanity, he would make an indifferent husband.
indigence   N. poverty. Neither the economists nor the political scientists have found a way to wipe out the inequities of wealth and eliminate indigence from our society, indigent, ADJ., N.
indigenous ADJ. native. Cigarettes are made of tobacco, a plant indigenous to the New World.
indigent ADJ. poor; destitute. Someone who is truly indigent can't even afford to buy a pack of cigarettes. [Don't mix up indigent and indigenous. See preceding entry.] also N.
indignation N. anger at an injustice. She felt indignation at the ill-treatment of the helpless animals.
indignity N. offensive or insulting treatment. Although he seemed to accept cheerfully the indignities heaped upon him, he was inwardly very angry.
indiscriminate	ADJ. choosing at random; confused. She disapproved of  her  son's  indiscriminate television viewing and decided to restrict him to educational programs.
indisputable ADJ. too certain to be disputed. In the face of these indisputable statements, I withdraw my complaint.
indissoluble ADJ. permanent. The indissoluble bonds of marriage are all too often being dissolved.
indite v. write; compose. Cyrano indited many letters for Christian.
indolent   ADJ. lazy. Couch potatoes .lead an indolent life lying back in their Lazyboy recliners watching TV. indolence, N.
indomitable ADJ. unconquerable; unyielding. Focusing on her game despite all her personal problems, tennis champion Steffi Graf displayed an indomitable will to win.
indubitable ADJ. unable to be doubted; unquestionable. Auditioning for the chorus line, Molly was an indubitable hit: the director fired the leading lady and hired Molly in her place!
induce v. persuade; bring about. After the quarrel, Tina said nothing could induce her to talk to Tony again, inducement, N.
inductive ADJ. pertaining to induction or proceeding from the specific to the general. The discovery of the planet Pluto is an excellent example of the results that can be obtained from inductive reasoning.
indulgent ADJ. humoring; yielding; lenient. Jay's mom was excessively indulgent: she bought him every computer game on the market. In fact, she indulged Jay so much, she spoiled him rotten.
industrious ADJ. diligent; hard-working. Look busy when the boss walks by your desk; it never hurts to appear industrious, industry, N.
inebriated ADJ. habitually intoxicated; drunk. Abe was inebriated more often than he was sober. Because of his inebriety, he was discharged from his job as a bus driver.
ineffable ADJ. unutterable; cannot be expressed in speech. Such ineffable joy must be experienced; it cannot be described.
ineffectual ADJ. not effective; weak. Because the candidate failed to get across her message to the public, her campaign was ineffectual.
ineluctable ADJ. irresistible; not to be escaped. He felt that his fate was ineluctable and refused to make any attempt to improve his lot.
inept ADJ. lacking skill; unsuited; incompetent. The inept glovemaker was all thumbs, ineptness, N.
inequity N. unfairness. In demanding equal pay for equal work, women protest the basic inequity of a system that allots greater financial rewards to men. inequitable, ADJ.
inerrancy N. infallibility. Jane refused to believe in the pope's inerrancy, reasoning: "All human beings are capable of error. The pope is a human being. Therefore, the pope is capable of error."
inert ADJ. inactive; lacking power to move. "Get up, you lazybones," Tina cried to Tony, who lay in bed inert. inertia, N.
inevitable ADJ. unavoidable. Though death and taxes are both supposedly inevitable, some people avoid paying taxes for years.
inexorable ADJ. relentless; unyielding; implacable. After listening to the pleas for clemency, the judge was inexorable and gave the convicted man the maximum punishment allowed by law.
infallible ADJ. unerring. We must remember that none of us is infallible; we all make mistakes.
infamous ADJ. notoriously bad. Charles Manson and Jeffrey Dahmer are two examples of infamous killers.
infantile ADJ. childish; infantlike. When will he outgrow such infantile behavior?
infer v. deduce; conclude. From the students' glazed looks, it was easy for me to infer that they were bored out of their minds, inference, N.
infernal ADJ. pertaining to hell; devilish. Batman was baffled: he could think of no way to hinder the Joker's infernal scheme to destroy the city.
infidel N. unbeliever. The Saracens made war against the infidels.
infiltrate v. pass into or through; penetrate (an organization) sneakily. In order to infiltrate enemy lines at night without being seen, the scouts darkened their faces and wore black coveralls, infiltrator, N.
infinitesimal ADJ. very small. In the twentieth century, physicists have made their greatest discoveries about the characteristics of infinitesimal objects like the atom and its parts.
infirmity N. weakness. Her greatest infirmity was lack of willpower.
inflated ADJ. exaggerated; pompous; enlarged (with air or gas). His claims about the new product were inflated; it did not work as well as he had promised.
influx N. flowing into. The influx of refugees into the country has taxed the relief agencies severely.
infraction N. violation (of a rule or regulation); breach. When basketball star Dennis Rodman butted heads with the referee, he committed a clear infraction of NBA rules.
indubitable ADJ. unable to be doubted; unquestionable. Auditioning for the chorus line, Molly was an indubitable hit: the director fired the leading lady and hired Molly in her place!
induce v. persuade; bring about. After the quarrel, Tina said nothing could induce her to talk to Tony again, inducement, N.
inductive ADJ. pertaining to induction or proceeding from the specific to the general. The discovery of the planet Pluto is an excellent example of the results that can be obtained from inductive reasoning.
indulgent ADJ. humoring; yielding; lenient. Jay's mom was excessively indulgent: she bought him every computer game on the market. In fact, she indulged Jay so much, she spoiled him rotten.
industrious ADJ. diligent; hard-working. Look busy when the boss walks by your desk; it never hurts to appear industrious, industry, N.
inebriated ADJ. habitually intoxicated; drunk. Abe was inebriated more often than he was sober. Because of his inebriety, he was discharged from his job as a bus driver.
ineffable ADJ. unutterable; cannot be expressed in speech. Such ineffable joy must be experienced; it cannot be described.
ineffectual ADJ. not effective; weak. Because the candidate failed to get across her message to the public, her campaign was ineffectual.
ineluctable ADJ. irresistible; not to be escaped. He felt that his fate was ineluctable and refused to make any attempt to improve his lot.
inept ADJ. lacking skill; unsuited; incompetent. The inept glovemaker was all thumbs, ineptness, N.
inequity N. unfairness. In demanding equal pay for equal work, women protest the basic inequity of a system that allots greater financial rewards to men. inequitable, ADJ.
inerrancy N. infallibility. Jane refused to believe in the pope's inerrancy, reasoning: "All human beings are capable of error. The pope is a human being. Therefore, the pope is capable of error."
inert , ADJ. inactive; lacking power to move. "Get up, you lazybones," Tina cried to Tony, who lay in bed inert. inertia, N.
inevitable ADJ. unavoidable. Though death and taxes are both supposedly inevitable, some people avoid paying taxes for years.
inexorable ADJ. relentless; unyielding; implacable. After listening to the pleas for clemency, the judge was inexorable and gave the convicted man the maximum punishment allowed by law.
infallible ADJ. unerring. We must remember that none of us is infallible; we all make mistakes.
infamous ADJ. notoriously bad. Charles Manson and Jeffrey Dahmer are two examples of infamous killers.
infantile ADJ. childish; infantlike. When will he outgrow such infantile behavior?
infer v. deduce; conclude. From the students' glazed looks, it was easy for me to infer that they were bored out of their minds, inference, N.
infernal ADJ. pertaining to hell; devilish. Batman was baffled: he could think of no way to hinder the Joker's infernal scheme to destroy the city.
infidel N. unbeliever. The Saracens made war against the infidels.
infiltrate v. pass into or through; penetrate (an organization) sneakily. In order to infiltrate enemy lines at night without being seen, the scouts darkened their faces and wore black coveralls, infiltrator, N.
infinitesimal ADJ. very small. In the twentieth century, physicists have made their greatest discoveries about the characteristics of infinitesimal objects like the atom and its parts.
infirmity N. weakness. Her greatest infirmity was lack of willpower.
inflated ADJ. exaggerated; pompous; enlarged (with air or gas). His claims about the new product were inflated; it did not work as well as he had promised.
influx N. flowing into. The influx of refugees into the country has taxed the relief agencies severely.
infraction N. violation (of a rule or regulation); breach. When basketball star Dennis Rodman butted heads with the referee, he committed a clear infraction of NBA rules.
infringe v. violate; encroach. I think your machine infringes on my patent and I intend to sue.
ingenious ADJ. clever; resourceful. Kit admired the ingenious way that her computer keyboard opened up to reveal the built-in CD-ROM below, ingenuity, N.
ingenuous   ADJ. naive and trusting; young; unsophisticated. The woodsman did not realize how ingenuous Little Red Riding Hood was until he heard that she had gone off for a walk in the woods with the Big Bad Wolf. ingenue, N.
ingrained ADJ. deeply established; firmly rooted. Try as they would, the missionaries were unable to uproot the ingrained superstitions of the natives.
ingrate N. ungrateful person. That ingrate Bob sneered at the tie I gave him.
ingratiate v. become popular with. He tried to ingratiate himself into her parents' good graces.
inherent   ADJ. firmly established by nature or habit. Katya's inherent love of justice caused her to champion anyone she considered to be treated unfairly by society.
inhibit v. restrain; retard or prevent. Only two things inhibited him from taking a punch at Mike Tyson: Tyson's left hook, and Tyson's right jab. The protective undercoating on my car inhibits the formation of rust, inhibition, N.
inimical ADJ. unfriendly; hostile; harmful; detrimental. I've always been friendly to Martha. Why is she so inimical to me?
inimitable ADJ. matchless; not able to be imitated. We admire Auden for his inimitable use of language; he is one of a kind.
iniquitous ADJ. wicked; immoral; unrighteous. Whether or not King Richard III was responsible for the murder of the two young princes in the Tower, it was an iniquitous deed, iniquity, N.
initiate v. begin; originate; receive into a group. The college is about to initiate a program for reducing math anxiety among students.
injurious ADJ. harmful. Smoking cigarettes can be injurious to your health.
inkling N. hint. This came as a complete surprise to me as I did not have the slightest inkling of your plans.
innate  ADJ. inborn. Mozart's parents soon recognized young Wolfgang's innate talent for music.
innocuous ADJ. harmless. An occasional glass of wine with dinner is relatively innocuous and should have no ill effect on most people.
innovation   N. change; introduction of something new. Although Richard liked to keep up with all the latest technological  innovations,  he  didn't always abandon tried and true techniques in favor of something new. innovate, v. innovative, ADJ.
innuendo N. hint; insinuation. I can defend myself against direct accusations; innuendos and oblique attacks on my character are what trouble me.
inopportune ADJ. untimely; poorly chosen. A rock concert is an inopportune setting for a quiet conversation.
inordinate ADJ. unrestrained; excessive. She had an inordinate fondness for candy, eating two or three boxes in a single day.
inquisitor N. questioner (especially harsh); investigator. Fearing being grilled ruthlessly by the secret police, Marsha faced her inquisitors with trepidation.
insalubrious ADJ. unwholesome; not healthful. The mosquito ridden swamp was an insalubrious place, a breeding ground for malarial contagion.
insatiable ADJ. not easily satisfied; unquenchable; greedy. The young writer's thirst for knowledge was insatiable; she was always in the library.
inscrutable ADJ. impenetrable; not readily understood; mysterious. Experienced poker players try to keep their expressions inscrutable, hiding their reactions to the cards behind a so-called poker face.
insensate ADJ. without feeling. She lay there as insensate as a log.
insensible   ADJ.  unconscious;  unresponsive.  Sherry and I are very different; at times when I would be covered with embarrassment, she seems insensible to shame.
insidious ADJ. treacherous; stealthy; sly. The fifth column is insidious because it works secretly within our territory for our defeat.
insightful ADJ. discerning; perceptive. Sol thought he was very insightful about human behavior, but actually he was clueless as to why people acted the way they did.
insinuate   v. hint; imply; creep in. When you said I looked robust, did you mean to insinuate that I'm getting fat?
insipid   ADJ. lacking in flavor; dull. Flat prose and flat ginger ale are equally insipid: both lack sparkle.
insolence N. impudent disrespect; haughtiness. How dare you treat me so rudely! The manager will hear of your insolence, insolent, ADJ.
insolvent ADJ. bankrupt; lacking money to pay. When rumors that he was insolvent reached his creditors, they began to press him for payment of the money due them, insolvency, N.
insomnia N. wakefulness; inability to sleep. She refused to join us in a midnight cup of coffee because she claimed it gave her insomnia.
insouciant ADJ. indifferent; without concern or care. Your insouciant attitude at such a critical moment indicates that you do not understand the gravity of the situation.
instigate v. urge; start; provoke. Delighting in making mischief, Sir Toby sets out to instigate a quarrel between Sir Andrew and Cesario.
insubordination N. disobedience; rebelliousness. At the slightest hint of insubordination from the sailors on the Bounty, Captain Bligh had them flogged; finally, they mutinied, insubordinate, ADJ.
insubstantial ADJ. lacking substance; insignificant; frail. His hopes for a career in acting proved insubstantial; no one would cast him, even in an insubstantial role.
insularity N. narrow-mindedness; isolation. The insularity of the islanders manifested itself in their suspicion of anything foreign, insular, ADJ.
insuperable ADJ. insurmountable; unbeatable. Though the odds against their survival seemed insuperable, the Apollo 13 astronauts reached earth safely.
insurgent ADJ. rebellious. Because the insurgent forces had occupied the capital and had gained control of the railway lines, several of the war correspondents covering the uprising predicted a rebel victory, also N. insurgency, N.
insurmountable ADJ. overwhelming; unbeatable; insuperable. Facing almost insurmountable obstacles, the members of the underground maintained their courage and will to resist.
insurrection N. rebellion; uprising. In retrospect, given how badly the British treated the American colonists, the eventual insurrection seems inevitable.
intangible ADJ. not able to be perceived by touch; vague. Though the financial benefits of his Oxford post were meager, Lewis was drawn to it by its intangible rewards: prestige, intellectual freedom, the fellowship of his peers.
integral ADJ. complete; necessary for completeness. Physical education is an integral part of our curriculum; a sound mind and a sound body are complementary.
integrate v. make whole; combine; make into one unit. She tried to integrate all their activities into one program.
integrity N. uprightness; wholeness. Lincoln, whose personal integrity has inspired millions, fought a civil war to maintain the integrity of the republic, that these United States might remain undivided for all time.
intellect N. higher mental powers. He thought college would develop his intellect.
intelligentsia N. intellectuals; members of the educated elite [often used derogatorily]. She preferred discussions about sports and politics to the literary conversations of the intelligentsia.
inter v. bury. They are going to inter the body tomorrow at Broadlawn Cemetry. interment, N.
interdict v. prohibit; forbid. Civilized nations must interdict the use of nuclear weapons if we expect our society to live.
interim N. meantime. The company will not consider our proposal until next week; in the interim, let us proceed as we have in the past.
interloper N. intruder. The merchant thought of his competitors as interlopers who were stealing away his trade.
interminable ADJ. endless. Although his speech lasted for only twenty minutes, it seemed interminable to his bored audience.
intermittent ADJ. periodic; on and off. The outdoor wedding reception had to be moved indoors to avoid the intermittent showers that fell on and off all afternoon.
internecine ADJ. mutually destructive. The rising death toll on both sides indicates the internecine nature of this conflict.
interregnum N. period between two reigns. Henry VIII desperately sought a male heir because he feared the civil strife that might occur if any prolonged interregnum succeeded his death.
interrogate v. question closely; cross-examine. Knowing that the Nazis would interrogate him about his background, the secret agent invented a cover story that would help him meet their questions.
intervene v. come between. When two close friends get into a fight, be careful if you try to intervene; they may join forces and gang up on you. intervention, N.
intimate v. hint. She intimated rather than stated her preferences.
intimidate v. frighten. I'll learn karate and then those big bullies won't be able to intimidate me anymore, intimidation, N.
intractable   ADJ. unruly; stubborn; unyielding. Charlie Brown's friend Pigpen was intractable: he absolutely refused to take a bath.
intransigence   N. refusal of any compromise; stubbornness.  The  negotiating team  had  not expected  such intransigence from the striking workers, who rejected any hint of a compromise, intransigent, ADJ.
intrepid ADJ. fearless. For her intrepid conduct nursing the wounded during the war, Florence Nightingale was honored by Queen Victoria.
intrinsic ADJ. essential; inherent; built-in. Although my grandmother's china has little intrinsic value, I shall always cherish it for the memories it evokes.
introspective ADJ. looking within oneself. Though young Francis of Assisi led a wild and worldly life, even he had introspective moments during which he examined his soul, introspection, N.
introvert N. one who is introspective; inclined to think more about oneself. In his poetry, he reveals that he is an introvert by his intense interest in his own problems.
intrude v. trespass; enter as an uninvited person. She hesitated to intrude on their conversation.
intuition N. immediate insight; power of knowing without reasoning. Even though Tony denied that anything was wrong, Tina trusted her intuition that something was bothering him. intuitive, ADJ. intuit, v.
inundate   v. overwhelm; flood; submerge. This semester I am inundated with work: you should see the piles of paperwork flooding my desk. Until the great dam was built, the waters of the Nile used to inundate the river valley every year.
inured   ADJ.   accustomed;   hardened.  She  became inured to the Alaskan cold.
invalidate v. weaken; destroy. The relatives who received little or nothing sought to invalidate the will by claiming that the deceased had not been in his right mind when he signed the document.
invective   N. abuse. He had expected criticism but not the invective that greeted his proposal.
inveigh v. denounce; utter censure or invective. He inveighed against the demagoguery of the previous speaker and urged that the audience reject his philosophy as dangerous.
inveigle v. lead astray; wheedle. She was inveigled into joining the club after an initial reluctance.
inverse ADJ. opposite. There is an inverse ratio between the strength of light and its distance.
invert v. turn upside down or inside out. When he inverted his body in a hand stand, he felt the blood rush to his head.
inopportune ADJ. untimely; poorly chosen. A rock concert is an inopportune setting for a quiet conversation.
inordinate ADJ. unrestrained; excessive. She had an inordinate fondness for candy, eating two or three boxes in a single day.
inquisitor N. questioner (especially harsh); investigator. Fearing being grilled ruthlessly by the secret police, Marsha faced her inquisitors with trepidation.
insalubrious ADJ. unwholesome; not healthful. The mosquito-ridden swamp was an insalubrious place, a breeding ground for malarial contagion.
insatiable ADJ. not easily satisfied; unquenchable; greedy. The young writer's thirst for knowledge was insatiable; she was always in the library.
inscrutable ADJ. impenetrable; not readily understood; mysterious. Experienced poker players try to keep their expressions inscrutable, hiding their reactions to the cards behind a so-called poker face.
insensate ADJ. without feeling. She lay there as insensate as a log.
insensible   ADJ.  unconscious;  unresponsive.  Sherry and I are very different; at times when I would be covered with embarrassment, she seems insensible to shame.
insidious ADJ. treacherous; stealthy; sly. The fifth column is insidious because it works secretly within our territory for our defeat.
insightful ADJ. discerning; perceptive. Sol thought he was very insightful about human behavior, but actually he was clueless as to why people acted the way they did.
insinuate   v. hint; imply; creep in. When you said I looked robust, did you mean to insinuate that I'm getting fat?
insipid   ADJ. lacking in flavor; dull. Flat prose and flat ginger ale are equally insipid: both lack sparkle.
insolence N. impudent disrespect; haughtiness. How dare you treat me so rudely! The manager will hear of your insolence, insolent, ADJ.
insolvent ADJ. bankrupt; lacking money to pay. When rumors that he was insolvent reached his creditors, they began to press him for payment of the money due them, insolvency, N.
insomnia N. wakefulness; inability to sleep. She refused to join us in a midnight cup of coffee because she claimed it gave her insomnia.
insouciant ADJ. indifferent; without concern or care. Your insouciant attitude at such a critical moment indicates that you do not understand the gravity of the situation.
instigate v. urge; start; provoke. Delighting in making mischief, Sir Toby sets out to instigate a quarrel between Sir Andrew and Cesario.
insubordination N. disobedience; rebelliousness. At the slightest hint of insubordination from the sailors on the Bounty, Captain Bligh had them flogged; finally, they mutinied, insubordinate, ADJ.
insubstantial ADJ. lacking substance; insignificant; frail. His hopes for a career in acting proved insubstantial; no one would cast him, even in an insubstantial role.
insularity N. narrow-mindedness; isolation. The insularity of the islanders manifested itself in their suspicion of anything foreign, insular, ADJ.
insuperable ADJ. insurmountable; unbeatable. Though the odds against their survival seemed insuperable, the Apollo 13 astronauts reached earth safely.
insurgent ADJ. rebellious. Because the insurgent forces had occupied the capital and had gained control of the railway lines, several of the war correspondents covering the uprising predicted a rebel victory, also N. insurgency, N.
insurmountable ADJ. overwhelming; unbeatable; insuperable. Facing almost insurmountable obstacles, the members of the underground maintained their courage and will to resist.
insurrection N. rebellion; uprising. In retrospect, given how badly the British treated the American colonists, the eventual insurrection seems inevitable.
intangible ADJ. not able to be perceived by touch; vague. Though the financial benefits of his Oxford post were meager, Lewis was drawn to it by its intangible rewards: prestige, intellectual freedom, the fellowship of his peers.
integral ADJ. complete; necessary for completeness. Physical education is an integral pan of our curriculum; a sound mind and a sound body are complementary.
integrate v. make whole; combine; make into one unit. She tried to integrate all their activities into one program.
integrity N. uprightness; wholeness. Lincoln, whose personal integrity has inspired millions, fought a civil war to maintain the integrity of the republic, that these United States might remain undivided for all time.
intellect N. higher mental powers. He thought college would develop his intellect.
intelligentsia N. intellectuals; members of the educated elite [often used derogatorily]. She preferred discussions about sports and politics to the literary conversations of the intelligentsia.
inter v. bury. They are going to inter the body tomorrow at Broadlawn Cemetry. interment, N.
interdict v. prohibit; forbid. Civilized nations must interdict the use of nuclear weapons if we expect our society to live.
interim N. meantime. The company will not consider our proposal until next week; in the interim, let us proceed as we have in the past.
interloper N. intruder. The merchant thought of his competitors as interlopers who were stealing away his trade.
interminable ADJ. endless. Although his speech lasted for only twenty minutes, it seemed interminable to his bored audience.
intermittent ADJ. periodic; on and off. The outdoor wedding reception had to be moved indoors to avoid the intermittent showers that fell on and off all afternoon.
internecine ADJ. mutually destructive. The rising death toll on both sides indicates the internecine nature of this conflict.
interpolate v. insert between. She talked so much that I could not interpolate a single remark.
inveterate ADJ. deep-rooted; habitual. She is an inveterate smoker and cannot break the habit.
invidious ADJ. designed to create ill will or envy. We disregarded her invidious remarks because we realized how jealous she was.
invincible   ADJ. unconquerable. Superman is invincible.
inviolable ADJ. secure from corruption, attack, or violation; unassailable. Batman considered his oath to keep the people of Gotham City safe inviolable: nothing on earth could make him break this promise, inviolability, N.
invocation N. prayer for help; calling upon as a reference or support. The service of Morning Prayer opens with an invocation during which we ask God to hear our prayers.
invoke v. call upon; ask for. She invoked her advisor's aid in filling out her financial aid forms.
invulnerable ADJ. incapable of injury. Achilles was invulnerable except in his heel.
iota N. very small quantity. She hadn't-an iota of common sense.
irascible ADJ. irritable; easily angered. Miss Minchin's irascible temper intimidated the younger schoolgirls, who feared she'd burst into a rage at any moment.
irate ADJ. angry. When John's mother found out that he had overdrawn his checking account for the third month in a row, she was so irate that she could scarcely speak to him.
iridescent ADJ. exhibiting rainbowlike colors. She admired the iridescent hues of the oil that floated on the surface of the water, iridescence, N.
irksome ADJ. annoying; tedious. He found working on the assembly line irksome because of the monotony of the operation he had to perform, irk, v.
ironic ADJ. occurring in an unexpected and contrary manner. It is ironic that his success came when he least wanted it.
irony N. hidden sarcasm or satire; use of words that seem to mean the opposite of what they actually mean. Gradually his listeners began to realize that the excessive praise he was lavishing on his opponent was actually irony; he was, in fact, ridiculing the poor fool.
irreconcilable ADJ. incompatible; not able to be resolved. Because the separated couple were irreconcilable, the marriage counselor recommended a divorce.
irrefutable ADJ. indisputable; incontrovertible; undeniable. No matter how hard I tried to find a good comeback for her argument, I couldn't think of one: her logic was irrefutable.
irrelevant ADJ. not applicable; unrelated. No matter how irrelevant the patient's mumblings may seem, they give us some indications of what is on his mind, irrelevancy, N.
irremediable ADJ. incurable; uncorrectable. The error she made was irremediable; she could see no way to repair it.
irreparable ADJ. not able to be corrected or repaired. Your apology cannot atone for the irreparable damage you have done to her reputation.
irrepressible ADJ. unable to be restrained or held back. My friend Kitty's curiosity was irrepressible: she poked her nose into everybody's business and just laughed when I warned her that curiosity killed the cat.
irreproachable ADJ. blameless; impeccable. Homer's conduct at the office party was irreproachable; even Marge had nothing bad to say about how he behaved.
irresolute   ADJ. uncertain how to act; weak. Once you have made your decision, don't waver; a leader should never appear irresolute.
irretrievable ADJ. impossible to recover or regain; irreparable. The left fielder tried to retrieve the ball, but it flew over the fence, bounced off a wall, and fell into the sewer: it was irretrievable.
irreverence N. lack of proper respect. Some people in the audience were amused by the irreverence of the comedian's jokes about the Pope; others felt offended by his lack of respect for their faith, irreverent, ADJ.
irrevocable ADJ. unalterable; irreversible. As Sue dropped the "Dear John" letter into the mailbox, she suddenly had second thoughts and wanted to take it back, but she could not: her action was irrevocable.
isotope N. varying form of an element. The study of the isotopes of uranium led to the development of the nuclear bomb.
isthmus N. narrow neck of land connecting two larger bodies of land. In a magnificent feat of engineering, Goethals and his men cut through the isthmus of Panama in constructing the Panama Canal.
itinerary   N. plan of a trip. Disliking sudden changes in plans when she traveled abroad, Ethel refused to make any alterations in her itinerary.
