jabber v. chatter rapidly or unintelligibly. Why does the fellow insist on jabbering away in French when I can't understand a word he says?
jaded ADJ. fatigued; surfeited. He looked for exotic foods to stimulate his jaded appetite.
jargon N. language used by a special group; technical terminology; gibberish. The computer salesmen at the store used a jargon of their own that we simply couldn't follow; we had no idea what they were jabbering about.
jaundiced ADJ. prejudiced (envious, hostile, or resentful); yellowed. Because Sue disliked Carolyn, she looked at Carolyn's paintings with a jaundiced eye, calling them formless smears. Newborn infants afflicted with jaundice look slightly yellow: they have jaundiced skin.
jaunt N. trip; short journey. He took a quick jaunt to Atlantic City.
jaunty ADJ. lighthearted; animated; easy and carefree. In Singing in the Rain, Gene Kelly sang and danced his way through the lighthearted title number in a properly jaunty style.
jeopardize v. endanger; imperil; put at risk. You can't give me a D in chemistry: you'll jeopardize my chances of being admitted to M.I.T. jeopardy, N.
jettison v. throw overboard. In order to enable the ship to ride safely through the storm, the captain had to jettison much of his cargo.
jibe v. agree; be in harmony with. Moe says Curly started the fight; Curly insists it was Moe. Their stories just don't jibe.
jingoist N. extremely aggressive and militant patriot; warlike chauvinist. Always bellowing "America first!" the congressman was such a jingoist you could almost hear the sabers rattling as he marched down the halls, jingoism, N.
jocose ADJ. given to joking. The salesman was so jocose that many of his customers suggested that he become a stand-up comic.
jocular ADJ. said or done in jest. Although Bill knew the boss hated jokes, he couldn't resist making one jocular remark; his jocularity cost him the job.
jocund ADJ. merry. Santa Claus is always cheerful and jocund.
jollity N. gaiety; cheerfulness. The festive Christmas dinner was a merry one, and old and young alike joined in the general jollity.
jostle v. shove; bump. In the subway he was jostled by the crowds.
jovial ADJ. good-natured; merry. A frown seemed out of place on his invariably jovial face.
jubilation N. rejoicing. There was great jubilation when the armistice was announced.
judicious ADJ. sound in judgment; wise. At a key moment in his life, he made a judicious investment that was the foundation of his later wealth.
juggernaut N. irresistible crushing force. Nothing could survive in the path of the juggernaut.
juncture N. crisis; joining point. At this critical juncture, let us think carefully before determining the course we shall follow.
junket N. trip, especially one taken for pleasure by an official at public expense. Though she maintained she had gone abroad to collect firsthand data on the Common Market, the opposition claimed that her trip was merely a political junket.
junta N. group of persons joined in political intrigue; cabal. As soon as he learned of its existence, the dictator ordered the execution of all of the members of the junta.
jurisprudence N. science of law. She was more a student of jurisprudence than a practitioner of the law.
justification N. good or just reason; defense; excuse. The jury found him guilty of the more serious charge because they could see no possible justification for his actions.
juxtapose v. place side by side. Comparison will be easier if you juxtapose the two objects.
