kaleidoscope N. tube in which patterns made by the reflection in mirrors of colored pieces of glass, etc., produce interesting symmetrical effects. People found a new source of entertainment while peering through the kaleidoscope; they found the ever-changing patterns fascinating.
ken N. range of knowledge. I cannot answer your question since this matter is beyond my ken.
kernel N. central or vital part; whole seed (as of corn). "Watson, buried within this tissue of lies there is a kernel of truth; when I find it, the mystery will be solved."
killjoy N. grouch; spoilsport. At breakfast we had all been enjoying our bacon and eggs until that killjoy John started talking about how bad animal fats and cholesterol were for our health.
kindle v. start a fire; inspire. One of the first things Ben learned in the Boy Scouts was how to kindle a fire by rubbing two dry sticks together. Her teacher's praise for her poetry kindled a spark of hope inside Maya.
kindred ADJ. related; similar in nature or character. Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn were two kindred spirits, also N.
kinetic ADJ. producing motion. Designers of the electric automobile find that their greatest obstacle lies in the development of light and efficient storage batteries, the source of the kinetic energy needed to propel the vehicle.
kismet   N. fate. Kismet is the Arabic word for "fate."
kleptomaniac N. person who has a compulsive desire to steal. They discovered that the wealthy customer was a kleptomaniac when they caught her stealing some cheap trinkets.
knave N. untrustworthy person; rogue; scoundrel. Any politician nicknamed Tricky Dick clearly has the reputation of a knave, knavery, N.
knead v. mix; work dough. Her hands grew strong from kneading bread.
knell N. tolling of a bell, especially to indicate a funeral, disaster, etc.; sound of the funeral bell. "The curfew tolls the knell of parting day." also v. knit v. contract into wrinkles; grow together. Whenever David worries, his brow knits in a frown. When he broke his leg, he sat around the house all day waiting for the bones to knit.
knoll N. little, round hill. Robert Louis Stevenson's grave is on a knoll m Samoa; to reach the grave site, you must climb uphill and walk a short distance along a marked path.
knotty ADJ. intricate; difficult; tangled. What to Watson had been a knotty problem to Sherlock Holmes was simplicity itself.
kudos N. honor; glory; praise. The singer complacently received kudos on his performance from his entourage.
