labile ADJ. likely to change; unstable. Because the hormonal changes they undergo affect their spirits, adolescents may become emotionally labile and experience sudden shifts of mood, lability, N.
laborious ADJ. demanding much work or care; tedious. In putting together his dictionary of the English language, Doctor Johnson undertook a laborious task.
labyrinth N. maze. Hiding from Indian Joe, Tom and Becky soon lost themselves in the labyrinth of secret underground caves.
laceration N. torn, ragged wound. The stock-car driver needed stitches to close the lacerations he received in the car crash, lacerate, v.
lachrymose ADJ. producing tears. His voice has a lachrymose quality that is more appropriate at a funeral than a class reunion.
lackadaisical ADJ. lacking purpose or zest; halfhearted; languid. Because Gatsby had his mind more on his love life than on his finances, he did a very lackadaisical job of managing his money.
lackluster ADJ. dull. We were disappointed by the lackluster performance.
laconic ADJ. brief and to the point. Many of the characters portrayed by Clint Eastwood are laconic types: strong men of few words.
laggard ADJ. slow; sluggish. The sailor had been taught not to be laggard in carrying out orders, lag, N., v.
lagoon   N. shallow body of water near a sea; lake. They enjoyed their swim in the calm lagoon.
laity N. laypersons; persons not connected with the clergy. The laity does not always understand the clergy's problems.
lambaste v. beat; thrash verbally or physically. It was painful to watch the .champion lambaste his opponent, tearing into him mercilessly.
lament v. grieve; express sorrow. Even advocates of the war lamented the loss of ,so many lives in combat, lamentation, N.
lampoon v. ridicule. This article lampoons the pretensions of some movie moguls, also N.
lancet N. small surgical tool for making incisions. With the sharp tip of her lancet, Doctor Wheeler cut into the abscess, opening it to let it drain.
languid ADJ. weary; sluggish; listless. Her siege of illness left her languid and pallid.
languish v. lose animation or strength. Left at Miss Minchin's school for girls while her father went off to war, Sarah Crewe refused to languish; instead, she hid her grief and actively befriended her less fortunate classmates.
languor N. lassitude; depression. His friends tried to overcome the languor into which he had fallen by taking him to parties and to the theater.
lank ADJ. long and thin. Lank, gaunt, Abraham Lincoln was a striking figure.
lap v. take in food or drink with one's tongue; splash gently. The kitten neatly lapped up her milk. The waves softly lapped against the pier.
larceny N. theft. Because of the prisoner's record, the district attorney refused to reduce the charge from grand larceny to petty larceny.
larder N. pantry; place where food is kept. The first thing Bill did on returning home from school was to check what snacks his mother had in the larder.
largess N. generous gift. Lady Bountiful distributed largess to the poor.
lascivious ADJ. lustful. Because they might arouse lascivious impulses in their readers, the lewd books were banned by the clergy.
lassitude   N. languor; weariness. After a massage and a long soak in the hot tub, I surrendered to my growing lassitude and lay down for a nap.
latent   ADJ.  potential  but  undeveloped;  dormant; hidden. Polaroid pictures are popular at parties because you can see the latent photographic image gradually appear before your eyes, latency, N.
lateral ADJ. coming from the side. In order to get good plant growth, the gardener must pinch off all lateral shoots.
latitude N. freedom from narrow limitations. I think you have permitted your son too much latitude in this matter.
laud   v. praise. The NFL lauded Boomer Esiason's efforts to raise money to combat cystic fibrosis. also N. laudable, laudatory, ADJ.
lavish ADJ. liberal; wasteful. The actor's lavish gifts pleased her. also v.
lax ADJ. careless. We dislike restaurants where the service is lax and inattentive.
leaven v. cause to rise or grow lighter; enliven. As bread dough is leavened, it puffs up, expanding in volume.
lechery N. gross lewdness; lustfulness. In his youth he led a life of lechery and debauchery; he did not mend his ways until middle age. lecherous, ADJ.
lectern   N.  reading  desk. The chaplain delivered his • sermon from a hastily improvised lectern.
leery ADJ. suspicious; cautious. Don't eat the sushi at this restaurant; I'm a bit leery about how fresh it is.
leeway N. room to move; margin. When you set a deadline, allow a little leeway.
legacy N. a gift made by a will. Part of my legacy from my parents is an album of family photographs.
legend N. explanatory list of symbols on a map. The legend at the bottom of the map made it clear which symbols stood for rest areas along the highway and which stood for public camp sites, (secondary meaning)
legerdemain N. sleight of hand. The magician demonstrated his renowned legerdemain.
leniency N. mildness; permissiveness. Considering the gravity of the offense, we were surprised by the leniency of the sentence, lenient, ADJ.
leonine   ADJ. like a lion. He was leonine in his rage.
lethal ADJ. deadly. It is unwise to leave lethal weapons where children may find them.
lethargic   ADJ. drowsy; dull. The stuffy room made her lethargic: she felt as if she was about to nod off. lethargy, N.
levee   N. earthen or stone embankment to prevent flooding. As the river rose and threatened to overflow the levee, emergency workers rushed to reinforce the walls with sandbags.
levitate v. float in the air (especially by magical means). As the magician passed his hands over the recumbent body of his assistant, she appeared to rise and levitate about three feet above the table.
levity   N. lack of seriousness or steadiness; frivolity. Stop giggling and wriggling around in the pew: such levity’s improper in church.
levy v. impose (a fine); collect (a payment). Crying "No taxation without representation!" the colonists demonstrated against England's power to levy taxes, also N.
lewd   ADJ. lustful. They found his lewd stories objectionable.
lexicographer N. compiler of a dictionary. The new dictionary is the work of many lexicographers who spent years compiling and editing the work.
lexicon N. dictionary. I cannot find this word in any lexicon in the library.
liability N. drawback; debts. Her lack of an extensive vocabulary was a liability that she was able to overcome.
liaison N. contact that keeps parties in communication; go-between; secret love affair. As the liaison between the American and British forces during World War II, the colonel had to ease tensions between the leaders of the two armies. Romeo's romantic liaison with Juliet ended in tragedy, also ADJ.
libel N. defamatory statement; act of writing something that smears a person's character. If Batman wrote that the Joker was a dirty, rotten, mass-murdering criminal, could the Joker sue Batman for be libelous, ADJ.
libertine N. debauched person, roué. Although she was aware of his reputation as a libertine, she felt she could reform him and help him abandon his dissolute way of life.
libidinous ADJ. lustful. They objected to his libidinous behavior.
libido N. emotional urges behind human activity. The psychiatrist maintained that suppression of the libido often resulted in maladjustment and neuroses.
libretto N. text of an opera. The composer of an opera's music is remembered more frequently than the author of its libretto.
licentious ADJ. amoral; lewd and lascivious; unrestrained. Unscrupulously seducing the daughter of his host, Don Juan felt no qualms about the immorality of his licentious behavior.
lien N. legal claim on a property. There was a delay before Ralph could take possession of his late uncle's home; apparently, another claimant had a lien upon the estate.
ligneous ADJ. like wood Petrified wood may be ligneous in appearance, but it is stone like in composition.
Lilliputian ADJ. extremely small. Tiny and delicate, the model was built on a Lilliputian scale, also N.
limber   ADJ. flexible. Hours of ballet classes kept him limber.
limbo N. region near heaven or hell where certain souls are kept; a prison (slang). Among the divisions of Hell are Purgatory and Limbo.
limn v. draw; outline; describe. Paradoxically, the more realistic the details this artist chooses, the better able she is to limn her fantastic, other-worldly landscapes.
limpid   ADJ. clear. A limpid stream ran through his property.
lineage N. descent; ancestry. He traced his lineage back to Mayflower days.
lineaments N. features, especially of- the face. She quickly sketched the lineaments of his face.
linger v. loiter or dawdle; continue or persist. Hoping to see Juliet pass by, Romeo lingered outside the Capulet house for hours. Though Mother made stuffed cabbage on Monday, the smell lingered around the house for days.
linguistic ADJ. pertaining to language. The modern tourist will encounter very little linguistic difficulty as English has become an almost universal language.
lionize v. treat as a celebrity. She enjoyed being lionized and adored by the public.
liquidate v. settle accounts; clear up, He was able to liquidate all his debts in a short period of time.
list v. tilt; lean over. That flagpole should be absolutely vertical; instead, it fete to one side, (secondary meaning) also N.
listless ADJ. lacking in spirit or energy. We had expected her to be full of enthusiasm and were surprised by her listless attitude.
litany N. supplicatory prayer. On this solemn day, the congregation responded to the prayers of the priest during the litany with fervor and intensity.
lithe ADJ. flexible; supple. Her figure was lithe and willowy.
litigation N. lawsuit. Try to settle this amicably; I do not want to start litigation, litigant, N.
litotes N. understatement for emphasis. To say, "He little realizes," when we mean that he does not realize at all, is an example of the kind of understatement we call litotes.
livid ADJ. lead-colored; black and blue; ashen; enraged. His face was so livid with rage that we were afraid that he might have an attack of apoplexy.
loath ADJ. reluctant; disinclined. Romeo and Juliet were both loath for him to go.
loathe v. detest. Booing and hissing, the audience showed how much they loathed the villain, loathsome, ADJ.
lode N. metalbearing vein. If this lode that we have discovered extends for any distance, we have found a fortune.
lofty ADJ. very high. Though Barbara Jordan's fellow students used to tease her about her lofty ambitions, she rose to hold one of the highest positions in the land. log N. record of a voyage or flight; record of day-to-day activities. "Flogged two seamen today for insubordination," wrote Captain Bligh in the Bounty's log. To see how much work I've accomplished recently, just take a look at the number of new files listed on my computer log. also v.
loiter v. hang around; linger. The policeman told him not to loiter in the alley.
loll v. lounge about. They lolled around in their chairs watching television.
longevity N. long life. When he reached ninety, the old man was proud of his longevity.
loom v. appear or take shape (usually in an enlarged or distorted form). The shadow of the gallows loomed threateningly above the small boy.
lope v. gallop slowly. As the horses loped along, we had an opportunity to admire the ever-changing scenery.
loquacious   ADJ. talkative. Though our daughter barely says a word to us these days, put a phone in her hand and see how loquacious she can be: our phone bills are out of sight! loquacity, N.
lout N. clumsy person. The delivery boy is an awkward lout, loutish, ADJ.
low v. moo. From the hilltop, they could see the herd like ants in the distance; they could barely hear the cattle low.
lucid   ADJ. easily understood; clear; intelligible. Lexy makes an excellent teacher: her explanations of technical points are lucid enough for a child to grasp, lucidity, N.
lucrative ADJ. profitable. He turned his hobby into a lucrative profession.
lucre N. money. Preferring lucre to undying fame, he wrote stories of popular appeal.
ludicrous ADJ. laughable; trifling. Let us be serious; this is not a ludicrous issue.
lugubrious ADJ. mournful. The lugubrious howling of the dogs added to our sadness.
lull N. moment of calm. Not wanting to get wet, they waited under the awning for a lull in the rain.
lumber v. move heavily or clumsily. Still somewhat torpid after its long hibernation, the bear lumbered through the woods.
lumen N. unit of light energy (one candle's worth). In buying light bulbs, she checked not only their power, as measured in watts, but their brightness, as measured in lumens.
luminary N. celebrity; dignitary. A leading light of the American stage, Ethel Barrymore was a theatrical luminary whose name lives on.
luminous   ADJ. shining; issuing light. The sun is a luminous body.
lunar ADJ. pertaining to the moon. Lunar craters can be plainly seen with the aid of a small telescope.
lunge v. make a quick forward dive or reach; thrust. The wide receiver lunged forward to grab the football. With his sword, Dartagnan lunged at his adversary, also N.
lurid ADJ. wild; sensational; graphic; gruesome. Do the lurid cover stories in the Enquirer actually influence people to buy that trashy tabloid?
lurk v. stealthily lie in waiting; slink; exist unperceived. "Who knows what evils lurk in the hearts of men? The Shadow knows."
luscious ADJ. pleasing to taste or smell. The ripe peach was luscious.
luster N. shine; gloss. The soft luster of the silk in the dim light was pleasing.
lustrous ADJ. shining. Her large and lustrous eyes gave a touch of beauty to an otherwise drab face.
luxuriant ADJ. abundant; rich and splendid; fertile. Lady Godiva was completely covered by her luxuriant hair.
