nadir N. lowest point. Although few people realized it, the Dow-Jones averages had reached their nadir and would soon begin an upward surge.
naivete N. quality of being unsophisticated; simplicity; artlessness; gullibility. Touched by the naivete of sweet, convent-trained Cosette, Marius pledges himself to protect her innocence, naive, ADJ.
narcissist N. conceited person. A narcissist is his own best friend.
narrative ADJ. related to telling a story. A born teller of tales, Olsen used her impressive narrative skills to advantage in her story "I Stand Here Ironing." also N. narration, N.
nascent ADJ. incipient; coming into being. If we could identify these revolutionary movements in their nascent state, we would be able to eliminate serious trouble in later years.
natation N. swimming. The Red Cross emphasizes the need for courses in natation.
natty ADJ. neatly or smartly dressed. Priding himself on being a natty dresser, the gangster Bugsy Siegel collected a wardrobe of imported suits and ties.
nauseate v. cause to become sick; fill with disgust. The foul smells began to nauseate her.
nautical ADJ. pertaining to ships or navigation. The Maritime Museum contains models of clipper ships, logbooks, anchors, and many other items of a nautical nature.
navigable ADJ. wide and deep enough to allow ships to pass through; able to be steered. So much sand had built up at the bottom of the canal that the waterway was barely navigable,
nebulous ADJ. vague; hazy; cloudy. Phil and Dave tried to come up with a clear, intelligible business plan, not some hazy, nebulous proposal.
necromancy N. black magic; dealings with the dead. The evil sorcerer performed feats of necromancy, calling on the spirits of the dead to tell the future, necromancer, N.
nefarious ADJ. very wicked. The villain's crimes, though various, were one and all nefarious.
negate   v. cancel out; nullify; deny. A sudden surge of adrenalin can negate the effects of fatigue: there's nothing like a good shock to wake you up. negation, N.
negligence N. neglect; failure to take reasonable care. Tommy failed to put back the cover on the well after he fetched his pail of water; because of his negligence, Kitty fell in. negligent, ADJ.
negligible ADJ. so small, trifling, or unimportant as to be easily disregarded. Because the damage to his car had been negligible, Michael decided he wouldn't bother to report the matter to his insurance company.
nemesis N. someone seeking revenge. Abandoned at sea in a small boat, the vengeful Captain Bligh vowed to be the nemesis of Fletcher Christian and his fellow mutineers.
neologism N. new or newly coined word or phrase. As we invent new techniques and professions, we must also invent neologisms such as "microcomputer" and "astro¬naut" to describe them.
neophyte    N. recent convert; beginner. This mountain slope contains slides that will challenge experts as well as neophytes.
nepotism N. favoritism (to a relative). John left his position with the company because he felt that advancement was based on nepotism rather than ability.
nether ADJ. lower. Tradition locates hell in the nether regions.
nettle v. annoy; vex. Do not let her nettle you with her sarcastic remarks.
nexus N. connection. I fail to see the nexus that binds these two widely separated events.
nib N. beak; pen point. The nibs of fountain pens often become clotted and corroded.
nicety N. precision; minute distinction. I cannot distinguish between such niceties of reasoning, nice, ADJ. (secondary meaning)
niggardly ADJ. meanly stingy; parsimonious. The niggardly pittance the widow receives from the government cannot keep her from poverty.
niggle v. spend too much time on minor points; carp. Let's not niggle over details, niggling, ADJ.
nihilist N. one who considers traditional beliefs to be groundless and existence meaningless; absolute skeptic; revolutionary terrorist. In his final days, Hitler revealed himself a power-mad nihilist, ready to annihilate all of Western Europe, even to destroy Germany itself, in order that his will might prevail. The root of the word nihilist is nihil, Latin for "nothing." nihilism, N.
nip v. stop something's growth or development; snip off; bite; make numb with cold. The twins were plotting mischief, but Mother intervened and nipped their plan in the bud. The gardener nipped oft a lovely rose and gave it to me. Last week a guard dog nipped the postman in the leg; this week the extreme chill nipped his fingers till he could barely hold the mail.
nirvana N. in Buddhist teachings, the ideal state in which the individual loses himself in the attainment of an impersonal beatitude. Despite his desire to achieve nirvana, the young Buddhist found that even the buzzing of a fly could distract him from his meditation.
nocturnal ADJ. done at night. Mr. Jones obtained a watchdog to prevent the nocturnal raids on his chicken coops.
noisome ADJ. foul-smelling; unwholesome. The noisome atmosphere downwind of the oil refinery not only stank but also damaged the lungs of everyone living in the area.
nomadic ADJ. wandering. Several nomadic tribes of Indians would hunt in this area each year, nomad, N.
nomenclature N. terminology; system of names. Sharon found Latin word parts useful in translating medical nomenclature: when her son had to have a bilateral myringotomy, she figured out that he needed a hole in each of his eardrums to end his earaches.
nominal ADJ. in name only; trifling. He offered to drive her to the airport for only a nominal fee.
nonchalance N. indifference; lack of concern; composure. Cool, calm, and collected under fire, James Bond shows remarkable nonchalance in the face of danger, nonchalant, ADJ.
noncommittal ADJ. neutral; unpledged; undecided. We were annoyed by his noncommittal reply for we had been led to expect definite assurances of his approval.
nondescript ADJ. undistinctive; ordinary. The private detective was a short, nondescript fellow with no outstanding features, the sort of person one would never notice in a crowd.
nonentity N. person of no importance; nonexistence. Because the two older princes dismissed their youngest brother as a nonentity, they did not realize that he was quietly plotting to seize the throne.
nonplus v. bring to a halt by confusion; perplex. Jack's uncharacteristic rudeness nonplussed Jill, leaving her uncertain how to react.
nostalgia N. homesickness; longing for the past. My grandfather seldom spoke of life in the old country; he had little patience with nostalgia, nostalgic, ADJ.
nostrum N. questionable medicine. No quack selling nostrums is going to cheat me.
notable ADJ. conspicuous; important; distinguished. Normally notable for his calm in the kitchen, today the head cook was shaking, for the notable chef Julia Child was coming to dinner, also N.
notoriety N. disrepute; ill fame. To the starlet, any publicity was good publicity: if she couldn't have a good reputation, she'd settle for notoriety, notorious, ADJ.
novelty N. something new; newness. The computer is no longer a novelty around the office, novel, ADJ.
novice N. beginner. Even a novice at working with computers can install Barren's Computer Study Program for the GRE by following the easy steps outlined in the user's manual.
noxious ADJ. harmful. We must trace the source of these noxious gases before they asphyxiate us.
nuance N. shade of difference in meaning or color; subtle distinction. Jody gazed at the Monet landscape for an hour, appreciating every subtle nuance of color in the painting.
nubile ADJ. marriageable. Mrs. Bennet, in Pride and Prejudice by Jane Austen, was worried about finding suitable husbands for her five nubile daughters.
nugatory ADJ. futile; worthless. This agreement is nugatory for no court will enforce it.
nullify v. to make invalid. Once the contract was nullified, it no longer had any legal force.
numismatist N. person who collects coins. The numismatist had a splendid collection of antique coins.
nuptial ADJ. related to marriage. Reluctant to be married in a traditional setting, they decided to hold their nuptial ceremony at the carousel in Golden Gate Park, nuptials, N. PL.
nurture v. nourish; educate; foster. The Head Start program attempts to nurture prekindergarten children so that they will do well when they enter public school, also N.
nutrient N. nourishing substance. As a budding nutritionist, Kim has learned to design diets that contain foods rich in important basic nutrients, also ADJ.
