oaf N. stupid, awkward person. "Watch what you're doing, you clumsy oaf!" Bill shouted at the waiter who had drenched him with iced coffee.
obdurate ADJ. stubborn. He was obdurate in his refusal to listen to our complaints.
obeisance N. bow. She made an obeisance as the king and queen entered the room.
obelisk N. tall column tapering and ending in a pyramid. Cleopatra's Needle is an obelisk in New York City's Central Park.
obese ADJ. excessively fat. It is advisable that obese people try to lose weight, obesity, N.
obfuscate v. confuse; muddle; cause confusion; make needlessly complex. Was the president's spokesman trying to clarify the Whitewater mystery, or was he trying to obfuscate the issue so the voters would never figure out what went on?
obituary N. death notice. I first learned of her death when I read the obituary in the newspaper, also ADJ.
objective ADJ. not influenced by emotions; fair. Even though he was her son, she tried to be objective about his behavior.
objective N. goal; aim. A degree in medicine was her ultimate objective.
obligatory ADJ. binding; required. It is obligatory that books borrowed from the library be returned within two weeks.
oblique ADJ. indirect; slanting (deviating from the perpendicular or from a straight line). Casting a quick, oblique glance at the reviewing stand, the sergeant ordered the company to march "Oblique Right."
obliterate v. destroy completely. The tidal wave obliterated several island villages.
oblivion N. obscurity; forgetfulness. After a decade of popularity, Hurston's works had fallen into oblivion; no one bothered to read them anymore.
oblivious ADJ. inattentive or unmindful; wholly absorbed. Deep in her book, Nancy was oblivious to the noisy squabbles of her brother and his friends.
obloquy N. slander; disgrace; infamy. I resent the obloquy that you are casting upon my reputation.
obnoxious ADJ. offensive. I find your behavior obnoxious; please mend your ways.
obscure ADJ. dark; vague; unclear. Even after I read the poem a fourth time, its meaning was still obscure, obscurity, N.
obscure v. darken; make unclear. At times he seemed purposely to obscure his meaning, preferring mystery to clarity.
obsequious ADJ. slavishly attentive; servile; sycophantic. Helen valued people who behaved as if they respected themselves; nothing irritated her more than an excessively obsequious waiter or a fawning salesclerk.
obsequy N. funeral ceremony. Hundreds paid their last respects at his obsequies.
obsessive ADJ. related to thinking about something constantly; preoccupying. Ballet, which had been a hobby, began to dominate his life: his love of dancing became obsessive, obsession, N.
obsidian N. black volcanic rock. The deposits of obsidian on the mountain slopes were an indication that the volcano had erupted in ancient times.
obsolete ADJ. outmoded. "Hip" is an obsolete expression; it went out with love beads and tie-dye shirts.
obstetrician N. physician specializing in delivery of babies. Unlike midwives, who care for women giving birth at home, obstetricians generally work in a hospital setting.
obstinate ADJ. stubborn; hard to control or treat. We tried to persuade him to give up smoking, but he was obstinate and refused to change. Blackberry stickers are the most obstinate weeds I know: once established in a yard, they're extremely hard to root out. obstinacy, N.
obstreperous ADJ. boisterous; noisy. What do you do when an obstreperous horde of drunken policemen carouses through your hotel, crashing into potted plants and singing vulgar songs?
obtrude v. push (oneself or one's ideas) forward or intrude; butt in; stick out or extrude. Because Fanny was reluctant to obtrude her opinions about child-raising upon her daughter-in-law, she kept a close watch on her tongue, obtrusive, ADJ. obtrusion, N.
obtuse ADJ. blunt; stupid. What can you do with somebody who's so obtuse that he can't even tell that you're insulting him?
obviate v. make unnecessary; get rid of. I hope this contribution will obviate any need for further collections of funds.
Occident N. the West. It will take time for the Occident to understand the ways and customs of the Orient.
occlude v. shut; close. A blood clot occluded an artery to the heart, occlusion, N.
occult ADJ. mysterious; secret; supernatural. The occult rites of the organization were revealed only to members, also N.
oculist N. physician who specializes in treatment of the eyes. In many states, an oculist is the only one who may apply medicinal drops to the eyes for the purpose of examining them.
odious ADJ. hateful; vile. Cinderella's ugly stepsisters had the odious habit of popping their zits in public.
odium N. detestation; hatefulness; disrepute. Prince Charming could not express the odium he felt toward Cinderella's stepsisters because of their mistreatment of poor Cinderella.
odoriferous ADJ. giving off an odor. The odoriferous spices stimulated her jaded appetite.
odorous ADJ. having an odor. This variety of hybrid tea rose is more odorous than the one you have in your garden.
odyssey N. long, eventful journey. The refugee's journey from Cambodia was a terrifying odyssey.
offensive ADJ. attacking; insulting; distasteful. Getting into street brawls is no minor offense for professional boxers, who are required by law to restrict their offensive impulses to the ring.
offhand ADJ. casual; done without prior thought. Expecting to be treated with due propriety by her hosts, Great-Aunt Maud was offended by their offhand manner.
officious   ADJ.  meddlesome;  excessively pushy  in offering one's services. After her long flight, Jill just wanted to nap, but the officious bellboy was intent on showing her all the special features of the deluxe suite.
ogle v. look at amorously; make eyes at. At the coffee house, Walter was too shy to ogle the pretty girls openly; instead, he peeked out at them from behind a rubber plant.
olfactory ADJ. concerning the sense of smell. A wine taster must have a discriminating palate and a keen olfactory sense, for a good wine appeals both to the taste buds and to the nose.
oligarchy N. government by a privileged few. One small clique ran the student council: what had been intended as a democratic governing body had turned into an oligarchy.
ominous ADJ. threatening. Those clouds are ominous; they suggest that a severe storm is on the way.
omnipotent ADJ. all-powerful. The monarch regarded himself as omnipotent and responsible to no one for his acts.
omnipresent ADJ. universally present; ubiquitous. On Christmas Eve, Santa Glaus is omnipresent.
omniscient ADJ. all-knowing. I do not pretend to be omniscient, but I am positive about this fact.
omnivorous ADJ. eating both plant and animal food; devouring everything. Some animals, including humans, are omnivorous and eat both meat and vegetables; others are either carnivorous or herbivorous.
onerous   ADJ. burdensome. She asked for an assistant because her work load was too onerous.
onomatopoeia N. words formed in imitation of natural sounds. Words like "rustle" and "gargle" are illustrations of onomatopoeia.
onslaught N. vicious assault. We suffered many casualties during the unexpected onslaught of the enemy troops.
onus N. burden; responsibility. The emperor was spared the onus of signing the surrender papers; instead, he relegated the assignment to his generals.
opalescent ADJ. iridescent; lustrous. The oil slick on the water had an opalescent, rainbowlike sheen. opalescence, N.
opaque ADJ. dark; not transparent. The opaque window kept the sunlight out of the room, opacity, N.
opiate N. medicine to induce sleep or deaden pain; something that relieves emotions or causes inaction. To say that religion is the opiate of the people is to condemn religion as a drug that keeps the people quiet and submissive to those in power.
opportune ADJ. timely; well-chosen. Cher looked at her father struggling to balance his checkbook; clearly this would not. be an opportune moment to ask him for an increase in her allowance.
opportunist N. individual who sacrifices principles for expediency by taking advantage of circumstances. Forget about ethics! He's such an opportunist that he'll vote in favor of any deal that will give him a break.
opprobrium N. infamy; vilification. He refused to defend himself against the slander and opprobrium hurled against him by the newspapers; he preferred to rely on his record.
optician N. maker and seller of eyeglasses. The patient took the prescription given him by his oculist to the optician.
optimist N. person who looks on the bright side. The pessimist says the glass is half-empty; the optimist says it is half-full.
optimum ADJ. most favorable. If you wait for the optimum moment to act, you may never begin your project, also N.
optional ADJ. not compulsory; left to one's choice. I was impressed by the range of optional accessories for my microcomputer that were available, option, N.
optometrist N. one who fits glasses to remedy visual defects. Although an optometrist is qualified to treat many eye disorders, she may not use medicines or surgery in her examinations.
opulence N. extreme wealth; luxuriousness; abundance. The glitter and opulence of the ballroom took Cinderella's breath away, opulent, ADJ.
opus N. work. Although many critics hailed his Fifth Symphony, he did not regard it as his major opus.
oracular ADJ. prophetic; uttered as if with divine authority; mysterious or ambiguous. Like many others who sought divine guidance from the oracle at Delphi, Oedipus could not understand the enigmatic oracular warning he received, oracle, N.
orator N. public speaker. The abolitionist Frederick Douglass was a brilliant orator whose speeches brought home to his audience the evils of slavery.
oratorio N. dramatic poem set to music. The Glee Club decided to present an oratorio during their recital.
ordain v. decree or command; grant holy orders; predestine. The king ordained that no foreigner should be allowed to enter the city. The Bishop of Michigan ordained David a deacon in the Episcopal Church. The young lovers felt that fate had ordained their meeting.
ordeal N. severe trial or affliction. June was so painfully shy that it was an ordeal for her to speak up when the teacher called on her in class.
ordinance N. decree. Passing a red light is a violation of a city ordinance.
ordination N. ceremony conferring holy orders. The candidate for ordination had to meet with the bishop and the diocesan officers before being judged ready to be ordained a deacon, ordain, v.
orgy N. wild, drunken revelry; unrestrained indulgence. The Roman emperor's orgies were far wilder than the toga party in the movie Animal House. When her income tax refund check finally arrived, Sally indulged in an orgy of shopping.
orient v. get one's bearings; adjust. Philip spent his first day in Denver orienting himself to the city.
orientation N. act of finding oneself in society. Freshman orientation provides the incoming students with an opportunity to learn about their new environment and their place in it.
orifice N. mouthlike opening; small opening. The Howe Caverns were discovered when someone observed that a cold wind was issuing from an orifice in the hillside.
ornate ADJ. excessively or elaborately decorated. With its elaborately carved, convoluted lines, furniture of the Baroque period was highly ornate.
ornithologist N. scientific student of birds. Audubon's drawings of American bird life have been of interest not only to the ornithologists but also to the general public.
orthodox ADJ. traditional; conservative in belief. Faced with a problem, she preferred to take an orthodox approach rather than shock anyone, orthodoxy, N.
orthography N. correct spelling. Many of us find English orthography difficult to master because so many of our words are not written phonetically.
oscillate   v. vibrate pendulumlike; waver. It is interesting to note how public opinion oscillates between the extremes of optimism and pessimism.
osseous ADJ. made of bone; bony. The hollow "soft spot" found at the top of the infant's skull gradually closes as new osseous tissue fills in the gap.
ossify v. change or harden into bone. When he called his opponent a "bonehead," he implied that his adversary's brain had ossified and that he was not capable of clear thinking.
ostensible ADJ. apparent; professed; pretended. Although the ostensible purpose of this expedition is to discover new lands, we are really interested in finding new markets for our products.
ostentatious   ADJ. showy; pretentious; trying to attract attention. Trump's latest casino in Atlantic City is the most ostentatious   gambling  palace  in  the  East:   it  easily out-glitters its competitors, ostentation, N.
ostracize v. exclude from public favor; ban. As soon as the newspapers carried the story of his connection with the criminals, his friends began to ostracize him. ostracism, N.
oust v. expel; drive out. The world wondered if Aquino would be able to oust Marcos from office.
outlandish ADJ. bizarre; peculiar; unconventional. The eccentric professor who engages in markedly outlandish behavior is a stock figure in novels with an academic setting.
outmoded ADJ. no longer stylish; old-fashioned. Unconcerned about keeping in style, Lenore was perfectly happy to wear outmoded clothes as long as they were clean and unfrayed.
outskirts N. fringes; outer borders. Living on the outskirts of Boston, Sarah sometimes felt as if she were cut off from the cultural heart of the city.
outspoken ADJ. candid; blunt. The candidate was too outspoken to be a successful politician; he had not yet learned to weigh his words carefully.
outstrip v. surpass; outdo. Jesse Owens easily outstripped his competitors to win the gold medal at the Olympic Games.
outwit v. outsmart; trick. By disguising himself as an old woman, Holmes was able to outwit his pursuers and escape capture.
ovation N. enthusiastic applause. When Placido Domingo came on stage in the first act of La Boheme, he was greeted by a tremendous ovation.
overbearing ADJ. bossy; arrogant; decisively important. Certain of her own importance and of the unimportance of everyone else, Lady Bracknell was intolerably overbearing in manner. "In choosing a husband," she said, "good birth is of overbearing importance; compared to that, neither wealth nor talent signifies."
overt ADJ. open to view. According to the United States Constitution, a person must commit an overt act before he may be tried for treason.
overweening ADJ. presumptuous; arrogant. His overweening pride in his accomplishments was not justified.
overwrought ADJ. extremely agitated; hysterical. When Kate heard the news of the sudden tragedy, she became too overwrought to work and had to leave the office early.
ovoid ADJ. egg-shaped. At Easter she had to cut out hundreds of brightly colored ovoid shapes.
