pachyderm N. thick-skinned animal. The elephant is probably the best-known pachyderm.
pacifist N. one opposed to force; antimilitarist. During the war, pacifists, though they refused to bear arms, served in the front lines as ambulance drivers and medical corpsmen. also ADJ. pacifism, N.
pacify v. soothe; make calm or quiet; subdue. Dentists criticize the practice of giving fussy children sweets to pacify them.
paean N. song of praise or joy. Paeans celebrating the victory filled the air.
painstaking ADJ. showing hard work; taking great care. The new high-frequency word list is the result of painstaking efforts on the part of our research staff.
palatable ADJ. agreeable; pleasing to the taste. Neither Jack's under baked opinions nor his overcooked casseroles were palatable to me.
palate N. roof of the mouth; sense of taste. When you sound out the letter "d," your tongue curves up to touch the edge of your palate. When Alice was sick, her mother made special meals to tempt her palate.
palatial ADJ. magnificent. He proudly showed us through his palatial home.
paleontology N. study of prehistoric life. The professor of paleontology had a superb collection of fossils.
palette N. board on which a painter mixes pigments. At the present time, art supply stores are selling a paper palette that may be discarded after use.
palimpsest N. parchment used for second time after original writing has been erased. Using chemical reagents, scientists have been able to restore the original writings on many palimpsests.
pall v. grow tiresome. The study of word lists can eventually pall and put one to sleep.
pallet N. small, poor bed. The weary traveler went to sleep on his straw pallet.
palliate v. ease pain; make less severe or offensive. If we cannot cure this disease at present, we can, at least, try to palliate the symptoms, palliation, N.
pallid ADJ. pale; wan. Because his occupation required that he work at night and sleep during the day, he had an exceptionally pallid complexion.
palpable ADJ. tangible; easily perceptible. I cannot understand how you could overlook such a palpable blunder.
palpitate v. throb; flutter. As she became excited, her heart began to palpitate more and more erratically.
paltry ADJ. insignificant; petty; trifling. "One hundred dollars for a genuine imitation Rolex watch! Lady, this is a paltry sum to pay for such a high-class piece of jewelry."
pan v. criticize harshly. Hoping for a rave review of his new show, the playwright was miserable when the critics panned it unanimously.
panacea N. cure-all; remedy for all diseases. There is no easy panacea that will solve our complicated international situation.
panache N. flair; flamboyance. Many performers imitate Noel Coward, but few have his panache and sense of style.
pandemic ADJ. widespread; affecting the majority of people. They feared the AIDS epidemic would soon reach pandemic proportions.
pandemonium N. wild tumult. When the ships collided in the harbor, pandemonium broke out among the passengers.
pander v. cater to the low desires of others. The reviewer accused the makers of Lethal Weapon of pandering to the masses' taste for violence.
panegyric N. formal praise. Blushing at all the praise heaped upon him by the speakers, the modest hero said, "I don't deserve such panegyrics."
panoramic ADJ. denoting an unobstructed and comprehensive view. On a clear day, from the top of the World Trade Center you can get a panoramic view of New York City and neighboring stretches of New Jersey and Long Island, panorama, N.
pantomime N. acting without dialogue. Because he worked in pantomime, the clown could be understood wherever he appeared, also v.
papyrus N. ancient paper made from stem of papyrus plant. The ancient Egyptians were among the first to write on papyrus.
parable N. short, simple story teaching a moral. Let us apply to our own conduct the lesson that this parable teaches.
paradigm N. model; example; pattern. Pavlov's experiment in which he trains a dog to salivate on hearing a bell is a paradigm of the conditioned-response experiment in behavioral psychology, paradigmatic, ADJ. paradox N. something apparently contradictory in nature; statement that looks false but is actually correct. Richard presents a bit of a paradox, for he is a card-carrying member of both the National Rifle Association and the relatively pacifist American Civil Liberties Union, paradoxical, ADJ.
paragon N. model of perfection. Her fellow students disliked Lavinia because Miss Minchin always pointed her out as a paragon of virtue.
parallelism N. state of being parallel; similarity. Although the twins were separated at birth and grew up in different adoptive families, a striking parallelism exists between their lives.
parameter N. limit; independent variable. We need to define the parameters of the problem.
paramount ADJ. foremost in importance; supreme. Proper nutrition and hygiene are of paramount importance in adolescent development and growth.
paramour N. illicit lover. She sought a divorce on the grounds that her husband had a paramour in another town.
paranoia N. psychosis marked by delusions of grandeur or persecution. Suffering from paranoia, he claimed everyone was out to get him. Ironically, his claim was accurate; even paranoids have enemies, paranoid, paranoiac, N. and ADJ.
paraphernalia N. equipment; odds and ends. Her desk was cluttered with paper, pen, ink, dictionary and other paraphernalia of the writing craft.
paraphrase v. restate a passage in one's own words while retaining thought of author. In 250 words or less, paraphrase this article, also N.
parasite N. animal or plant living on another; toady; sycophant. The tapeworm is an example of the kind of parasite that may infest the human body.
parched ADJ. extremely dry; very thirsty. The parched desert landscape seemed hostile to life.
pariah N. social outcast. If everyone ostracized singer Mariah Carey, would she then be Mariah the pariah?
parity N. equality; close resemblance. I find your analogy inaccurate because I do not see the parity between the two illustrations.
parlance N. language; idiom. All this legal parlance confuses me; I need an interpreter.
parley   N. conference. The peace parley has not produced the anticipated truce, also v. parochial   ADJ.  narrow in outlook;  provincial;  related to parishes. Although Jane Austen writes novels set in small rural communities, her concerns are universal, not parochial.
parody N. humorous imitation; spoof; takeoff; travesty. The show Forbidden Broadway presents parodies spoofing the year's new productions playing on Broadway, also v.
paroxysm N. fit or attack of pain, laughter, rage. When he heard of his son's misdeeds, he was seized by a paroxysm of rage.
parquet N. floor made of wood strips inlaid in a mosaic-like pattern. In laying the floor, the carpenters combined redwood and oak in an elegant parquet.
parry v. ward off a blow; deflect. Unwilling to injure his opponent in such a pointless clash, Dartagnan simply tried to parry his rival's thrusts. What fun it was to watch Katherine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy parry each other's verbal thrusts in their classic screwball comedies! also N.
parsimony N. stinginess; excessive frugality. Silas Marner's parsimony did not allow him to indulge in any luxuries, parsimonious, ADJ.
partial ADJ. incomplete; having a liking for something. In this issue we have published only a partial list of contributors because we lack space to acknowledge everyone. I am extremely partial to chocolate eclairs, partiality, N.
partiality N. inclination; bias. As a judge, not only must I be unbiased, but I must also avoid any evidence of partiality when I award the prize.
partisan   ADJ. one-sided; prejudiced; committed to a party. Rather than joining forces to solve our nation's problems, the Democrats and Republicans spend their time on partisan struggles, also N.
partition v. divide into parts. Before their second daughter was born, Jason and Lizzie decided each child needed a room of her own, and so they partitioned a large bedroom into two small but separate rooms, also N.
passé ADJ. old-fashioned; past the prime. Her style is passé and reminiscent of the Victorian era.
passive ADJ. not active; acted upon. Mahatma Gandhi urged his followers to pursue a program of passive resistance as he felt that it was more effective than violence and acts of terrorism.
pastiche N. imitation of another's style in musical composition or in writing. We cannot even say that her music is a pastiche of this or that composer; it is, rather, reminiscent of many musicians.
pastoral ADJ. rural. In these stories of pastoral life, we find an understanding of the daily tasks of country folk.
patent ADJ. open for the public to read; obvious. It was patent to everyone that the witness spoke the truth.
pathetic ADJ. causing sadness, compassion, pity; touching. Everyone in the auditorium was weeping by the time she finished her pathetic tale about the orphaned boy.
pathological   ADJ. pertaining to disease. As we study the pathological aspects of this disease, we must not overlook the psychological elements.
pathos N. tender sorrow; pity; quality in art or literature that produces these feelings. The quiet tone of pathos that ran through the novel never degenerated into the maudlin or the overly sentimental.
patina N. green crust on old bronze works; tone slowly taken by varnished painting. Judging by the patina on this bronze statue, we can conclude that this is the work of a medieval artist.
patois N. local or provincial dialect. His years of study of the language at the university did not enable him to understand the patois of the natives.
patriarch N. father and ruler of a family or tribe. In many primitive tribes, the leader and lawmaker was the patriarch.
patrician ADJ. noble; aristocratic. We greatly admired her well-bred, patrician elegance, also N.
patronize v. support; act superior toward; be a customer of. Penniless artists hope to find some wealthy art lover who will patronize them. If some condescending wine steward patronized me because he saw I knew nothing about fine wine, I'd refuse to patronize his restaurant.
paucity N. scarcity. They closed the restaurant because the paucity of customers made it uneconomical to operate.
pauper N. very poor person. Though Widow Brown was living on a reduced income, she was by no means a pauper.
peccadillo N. slight offense. Whenever Huck swiped a cookie from the jar, Miss Watson reacted as if he were guilty of armed robbery, not of some mere peccadillo.
pecuniary ADJ. pertaining to money. Seldom earning enough to cover their expenses, folk-dance teachers work because they love dancing, not because they expect any pecuniary reward.
pedagogue N. teacher. He could never be a stuffy pedagogue; his classes were always lively and filled with humor.
pedagogy N. teaching; art of education. Though Maria Montessori gained fame for her innovations in pedagogy, it took years before her teaching techniques became common practice in American schools.
pedant N. scholar who overemphasizes book learning or technicalities. Her insistence that the book be memorized marked the teacher as a pedant rather than a scholar.
pedantic ADJ. showing off learning; bookish. Leavening her decisions with humorous, down-to-earth anecdotes, Judge Judy was not at all the pedantic legal scholar, pedantry, N.
pedestrian ADJ. ordinary; unimaginative. Unintentionally boring, he wrote page after page of pedestrian prose.
pediatrician N. physician specializing in children's diseases. The family doctor advised the parents to consult a pediatrician about their child's ailment.
peerless ADJ. having no equal; incomparable. The reigning operatic tenor of his generation, to his admirers Luciano Pavarotti was peerless: no one could compare with him.
pejorative ADJ. negative in connotation; having a belittling effect. Instead of criticizing Clinton's policies, the Republicans made pejorative remarks about his character.
pell-mell ADV. in confusion; disorderly. The excited students dashed pell-mell into the stadium to celebrate the victory.
pellucid ADJ. transparent; limpid; easy to understand. After reading these stodgy philosophers, I find his pellucid style very enjoyable.
penance N. self-imposed punishment for sin. The Ancient Mariner said, "I have penance done and penance more will do," to atone for the sin of killing the albatross.
penchant   N. strong inclination; liking. Dave has a penchant tor taking risks: one semester he went steady with three girls, two of whom were stars on the school karate team.
pendant   ADJ. hanging down from something. Her pendant earrings glistened in the light, pendant   N. ornament (hanging from a necklace, etc.). The grateful team presented the coach with a silver chain and pendant engraved with the school's motto.
pendulous ADJ. hanging; suspended. The pendulous chandeliers swayed in the breeze as if they were about to fall from the ceiling.
penitent ADJ. repentant. When he realized the enormity of his crime, he became remorseful and penitent, also N.
pensive ADJ. dreamily thoughtful; thoughtful with a hint of sadness; contemplative. The pensive lover gazed at the portrait of his beloved and sighed deeply.
penumbra N. partial shadow (in an eclipse). During an eclipse, we can see an area of total darkness and a lighter area, which is the penumbra.
penury   N. severe poverty; stinginess. When his pension fund failed, George feared he would end his days in penury. He became such a penny-pincher that he turned into a closefisted, penurious miser.
peon N. landless agricultural worker; bond servant. The land reformers sought to liberate the peons and establish them as independent farmers, peonage, N.
perceptive ADJ. insightful; aware; wise. Although Maud was a generally perceptive critic, she had her blind spots: she could never see flaws in the work of her friends.
percussion ADJ. striking one object against another sharply. The drum is a percussion instrument, also N.
perdition N. damnation; complete ruin. Praying for salvation, young Daedalus feared he was damned to eternal perdition.
peregrination N. journey. Auntie Mame was a world traveler whose peregrinations took her from Tijuana to Timbuktu.
peremptory ADJ. demanding and leaving no choice. From Jack's peremptory knock on the door, Jill could tell he would not give up until she let him in.
perennial   N. something long-lasting. These plants are hardy perennials and will bloom for many years, also ADJ.
perfidious   ADJ. treacherous; disloyal. When Caesar realized that Brutus had betrayed him, he reproached his perfidious friend, perfidy, N.
perforate v. pierce; put a hole through. Before you can open the aspirin bottle, you must first perforate the plastic safety seal that covers the cap.
perfunctory   ADJ.  superficial;  not thorough;  lacking interest, care, or enthusiasm. The auditor's perfunctory inspection of the books overlooked many errors.
perigee N. point of moon's orbit when it is nearest the earth. The rocket which was designed to take photographs of the moon was launched as the moon approached its perigee.
perimeter N. outer boundary. To find the perimeter of any quadrilateral, we add the lengths of the four sides.
peripatetic ADJ. walking about; moving. The peripatetic school of philosophy derives its name from the fact that Aristotle walked with his pupils while discussing philosophy with them.
peripheral ADJ. marginal; outer. We lived, not in central London, but in one of those peripheral suburbs that spring up on the outskirts of a great city.
periphery N. edge, especially of a round surface. He sensed that there was something just beyond the periphery of his vision.
perjury N, false testimony while under oath. Rather than lie under oath and perhaps be indicted for perjury, the witness chose to take the Fifth Amendment, refusing to answer any questions on the grounds that he might incriminate himself.
permeable   ADJ. penetrable; porous; allowing liquids or gas to pass through.  If your jogging clothes weren't made out of permeable fabric, you'd drown in your own sweat (figuratively speaking), permeate, v.
pernicious ADJ. very destructive. The Athenians argued that Socrates's teachings had a pernicious effect on young and susceptible minds; therefore, they condemned him to death.
peroration N. conclusion of an oration. The peroration was largely hortatory and brought the audience to its feet clamoring for action at its close.
perpetrate v. commit an offense. Only an insane person could perpetrate such a horrible crime.
perpetual ADJ. everlasting. Ponce de Leon hoped to find the legendary fountain of perpetual youth.
perpetuate v. make something last; preserve from extinction. Some critics attack The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn because they believe Twain's book perpetuates a false image of blacks in this country, perpetuity, N.
perquisite N. any gain above stipulated salary. The perquisites attached to this job make it even more attractive than the salary indicates.
personable ADJ. attractive. The individual I am seeking to fill this position must be personable since he or she will be representing us before the public.
perspicacious ADJ. having insight; penetrating; astute. The brilliant lawyer was known for his perspicacious deductions.
perspicuity N. clearness of expression; freedom from ambiguity. One of the outstanding features of this book is the perspicuity of its author; her meaning is always clear.
perspicuous ADJ. plainly expressed. Her perspicuous comments eliminated all possibility of misinterpretation.
pert ADJ. impertinent; forward. I think your pert and impudent remarks call for an apology.
pertinacious ADJ. stubborn; persistent. She is bound to succeed because her pertinacious nature will not permit her to quit.
pertinent ADJ. suitable; to the point. The lawyer wanted to know all the pertinent details.
perturb v. disturb greatly. The thought that electricity might be leaking out of the empty light-bulb sockets perturbed my aunt so much that at night she crept about the house screwing fresh bulbs in the vacant spots, perturbation, N.
pervasive ADJ. spread throughout. Despite airing them for several hours, she could not rid her clothes of the pervasive odor of mothballs that clung to them, pervade, v.
perverse ADJ. stubbornly wrongheaded; wicked and unacceptable. When Jack was in a perverse mood, he would do the opposite of whatever Jill asked him. When Hannibal Lecter was in a perverse mood, he ate the flesh of his victims, perversity, N.
perversion N. corruption; turning from right to wrong. Inasmuch as he had no motive for his crimes, we could not understand his perversion.
 pessimism N, belief that life is basically bad or evil; gloominess. Considering how well you have done in the course so far, you have no real reason for such pessimism about your final grade, pessimistic, ADJ.
pestilential ADJ. causing plague; baneful. People were afraid to explore the pestilential swamp, pestilence, N.
pestle N. tool for mashing or grinding substances in a hard bowl. From the way in which the elderly pharmacist pounded the drug with his pestle, young George could tell that his employer was agitated about something.
petrify v. turn to stone. His sudden and unexpected appearance seemed to petrify her.
petty ADJ. trivial; unimportant; very small. She had no major complaints to make about his work, only a few petty quibbles that were almost too minor to state.
petulant ADJ. touchy; peevish. If you'd had hardly any sleep for three nights and people kept on phoning and waking you up, you'd sound petulant, too. petulance, N.
Pharisaical ADJ. pertaining to the Pharisees, who paid scrupulous attention to tradition; self-righteous; hypocritical. Walter Lippmann has pointed out that moralists who do not attempt to explain the moral code they advocate are often regarded as Pharisaical and ignored.
phenomena N, PL. observable facts; subjects of scientific investigation. We kept careful records of the phenomena we noted in the course of these experiments, phenomenon, SING.
philanderer N. faithless lover; flirt. Swearing he had never so much as looked at another woman, Jack assured Jill he was no philanderer.
philanthropist N. lover of mankind; doer of good. In his role as philanthropist and public benefactor, John D. Rockefeller, Sr., donated millions to charity; as an individual, however, he was a tight-fisted old man.
philatelist N. stamp-collector. When she heard the value of the Penny Black stamp, Phyllis was inspired to become a philatelist.
Philistine N. narrow-minded person, uncultured and exclusively interested in material gain. We need more men and women of culture and enlightenment; we have too many philistines among us.
philology N. study of language. The professor of philology advocated the use of Esperanto as an international language.
phlegmatic   ADJ. calm; not easily disturbed. The nurse was a cheerful but phlegmatic person, unexcited in the face of sudden emergencies.
phobia N. morbid fear. Her fear of flying was more than mere nervousness; it was a real phobia.
phoenix N. symbol of immortality or rebirth. Like the legendary phoenix rising from its ashes, the city of San Francisco rose again after its destruction during the 1906 earthquake.
phylum N. major classification, second to kingdom, of plants and animals; division. In sorting out her hundreds of packets of seeds, Katya decided to file them by phylum.
physiognomy N. face. He prided himself on his ability to analyze a person's character by studying his physiognomy.
physiological ADJ. pertaining to the science of the function of living organisms. To understand this disease fully, we must examine not only its physiological aspects but also its psychological elements.
piebald ADJ. of different colors; mottled; spotted. You should be able to identify Polka Dot in this race; he is the only piebald horse running.
piecemeal ADV. one part at a time; gradually. Tolstoy's War and Peace is too huge to finish in one sitting; I'll have to read it piecemeal.
pied ADJ. variegated; multicolored. The Pied Piper of Hamelin got his name from the multicolored clothing he wore.
piety   N. devoutness; reverence for God. Living her life in prayer and good works, Mother Teresa exemplified the true spirit of piety, pious, ADJ.
pigment N. coloring matter. Van Gogh mixed various pigments with linseed oil to create his paints.
pillage v. plunder. The enemy pillaged the quiet village and left it in ruins, also N.
pillory v. punish by placing in a wooden frame; subject to criticism and ridicule. Even though he was mocked and pilloried, he maintained that he was correct in his beliefs, also N.
pine v. languish, decline; long for; yearn. Though she tried to be happy living with Clara in the city, Heidi pined for the mountains and for her gruff but loving grandfather.
pinion v. restrain. They pinioned his arms against his body but left his legs free so that he could move about, also N.
pinnacle N. peak. We could see the morning sunlight illuminate the pinnacle while the rest of the mountain lay in shadow.
pious ADJ. devout; religious. The challenge for church people today is how to be pious in the best sense, that is, to be devout without becoming hypocritical or sanctimonious, piety, N.
piquant ADJ. pleasantly tart-tasting; stimulating. The piquant sauce added to our enjoyment of the meal, piquancy, N.
pique N. irritation; resentment. She showed her pique at her loss by refusing to appear with the other contestants at the end of the competition.
pique v. provoke or arouse; annoy. "I know something you don't know," said Lucy, trying to pique Ethel's interest.
piscatorial ADJ. pertaining to fishing. He spent many happy hours at the lake in his piscatorial activities.
pitfall N. hidden danger; concealed trap. The preacher warned his flock to beware the pitfall of excessive pride, for pride brought on the angels' fall.
pith N. core or marrow; essence; substance. In preparing a pineapple for the table, first slice it in half and remove the woody central pith.
pithy ADJ. concise; meaningful; substantial; meaty. While other girls might have gone on and on about how uncool Elton was, Cher summed it up in one pithy remark: "He's bogus!"
pittance N. a small allowance or wage. He could not live on the pittance he received as a pension and had to look for an additional source of revenue.
pivotal ADJ. central; critical. De Klerk's decision to set Nelson Mandela free was pivotal: without Mandela's release, there was no possibility that the African National Congress would entertain talks with the South African government.
placate v. pacify; conciliate. The store manager tried to placate the angry customer, offering to replace the damaged merchandise or to give back her money.
placebo N. harmless substance prescribed as a dummy pill. In a controlled experiment, fifty volunteers were given erythromycin tablets; the control group received only placebos.
placid ADJ. peaceful; calm. After his vacation in this placid section, he felt soothed and rested.
plagiarize v. steal another's ideas and pass them off as one's own. The teacher could tell that the student had plagiarized parts of his essay; she recognized whole paragraphs straight from Barren's Book Notes, plagiarism, N.
plaintive ADJ. mournful. The dove has a plaintive and melancholy call.
plait v. braid; intertwine. The maypole dancers plaited bright green ribbons in their hair, also N.
plasticity   N. ability to be molded. When clay dries out, it loses its plasticity and becomes less malleable.
platitude   N. trite remark; commonplace statement. In giving advice to his son, old Polonius expressed himself only in platitudes; every word out of his mouth was a truism.
platonic ADJ. purely spiritual; theoretical; without sensual desire. Accused of impropriety in his dealings with female students, the professor maintained he had only a platonic interest in the women involved.
plaudit N. enthusiastic approval; round of applause. The theatrical company reprinted the plaudits of the critics in its advertisements, plauditory, ADJ.
plausible ADJ. having a show of truth but open to doubt; specious. Your mother made you stay home from school because she needed you to program the VCR? I'm sorry, you'll have to come up with a more plausible excuse than that.
plebeian ADJ. common; pertaining to the common people. His speeches were aimed at the plebeian minds and emotions; they disgusted the more refined.
plenary ADJ. complete; full. The union leader was given plenary power to negotiate a new contract with the employers.
plenitude N. abundance; completeness. Looking in the pantry, we admired the plenitude of fruits and pickles we had preserved during the summer,
plethora   N. excess; overabundance. She offered a
plethora of excuses for her shortcomings.
pliable ADJ. flexible; yielding; adaptable. In remodeling the bathroom, we replaced all the old, rigid lead pipes with new, pliable copper tubing.
pliant ADJ. flexible; easily influenced. Pinocchio's disposition was pliant, he was like putty in his tempters' hands.
plight N. condition, state (especially a bad state or condition); predicament. Loggers, unmoved by the plight of the spotted owl, plan to keep on felling trees whether or not they ruin the bird's habitat.
pluck N. courage. Even the adversaries of young Indiana Jones were impressed by the boy's pluck in trying to rescue the archeological treasure they had stolen.
plumage N. feathers of a bird. Bird watchers identify different species of birds by their characteristic songs and distinctive plumage.
plumb v. examine critically in order to understand; measure depth (by sounding). Try as he would, Watson could never fully plumb the depths of Holmes's thought processes.
plumb ADJ. vertical. Before hanging wallpaper it is advisable to drop a plumb line from the ceiling as a guide, also N.
plummet   v. fall sharply. Stock prices plummeted as Wall Street reacted to the rise in interest rates.
plutocracy N. society ruled by the wealthy. From the way the government caters to the rich, you might think our society is a plutocracy rather than a democracy.
podiatrist N. doctor who treats ailments of the feet. He consulted a podiatrist about his fallen arches.
podium N. pedestal; raised platform. The audience applauded as the conductor made her way to the podium.
poignancy N. quality of being deeply moving; keenness of emotion. Watching the tearful reunion of the long-separated mother and child, the social worker was touched by the poignancy of the scene, poignant, ADJ.
polarize v. split into opposite extremes or camps. The abortion issue has polarized the country into pro-choice and anti-abortion camps.
polemic N. controversy; argument in support of point of view. Her essays were, for the main part, polemics for the party's policy.
polemical ADJ. aggressive in verbal attack; disputatious. Lexy was a master of polemical rhetoric; she should have worn a T-shirt with the slogan "Born to Debate."
politic ADJ. expedient; prudent; well devised. Even though he was disappointed, he did not think it politic to refuse this offer.
polity N. form of government of nation or state. Our polity should be devoted to the concept that the government should strive for the good of all citizens.
polygamist N. one who has more than one spouse at a time. He was arrested as a polygamist when his two wives filed complaints about him.
polyglot ADJ. speaking several languages. New York City is a polyglot community because of the thousands of immigrants who settle there.
pomposity N. self-important behavior; acting like a stuffed shirt. Although the commencement speaker had some good things to say, we had to laugh at his pomposity and general air of parading his own dignity, pompous, ADJ.
ponderous ADJ. weighty; unwieldy. His humor lacked the light touch; his jokes were always ponderous.
pontifical ADJ. pertaining to a bishop or pope; pompous or pretentious. From the very beginning of his ministry it was clear from his pontifical pronouncements that John was destined for a high pontifical office.
pore v. study industriously; ponder; scrutinize. Determined to become a physician, Beth spends hours poring over her anatomy text.
porous ADJ. full of pores; like a sieve. Dancers like to wear porous clothing because it allows the ready passage of water and air.
portend v. foretell; presage. The king did not know what these omens might portend and asked his soothsayers to interpret them.
portent N. sign; omen; forewarning. He regarded the black cloud as a portent of evil.
portly ADJ. stout; corpulent. The salesclerk tactfully referred to the overweight customer as portly rather than fat.
poseur   N. person who pretends to be sophisticated, elegant, etc., to impress others. Some thought Dali was a brilliant painter; others dismissed him as a poseur. posterity   N. descendants; future generations. We hope to leave a better world to posterity. posthumous   ADJ.  after death  (as of child  born after father's death or book published after author's death). The critics ignored his works during his lifetime; it was only after the posthumous publication of his last novel that they recognized his great talent.
postulate N. self-evident truth. We must accept these statements as postulates before pursuing our discussions any further, also v.
posture v. assume an affected pose; act artificially. No matter how much Arnold boasted or postured, I could not believe he was as important as he pretended to be.
potable ADJ. suitable for drinking. The recent drought in the Middle Atlantic States has emphasized the need for extensive research in ways of making sea water potable. also N.
potent ADJ. powerful; persuasive; greatly influential. Looking at the expiration date on the cough syrup bottle, we wondered whether the medication would still be potent, potency, N.
potentate   N. monarch; sovereign. The potentate spent more time at Monte Carlo than he did at home on his throne.
potential   ADJ. expressing possibility; latent. This juvenile delinquent is a potential murderer, also N.
potion N. dose (of liquid). Tristan and Isolde drink a love potion in the first act of the opera.
potpourri N. heterogeneous mixture; medley. The folk singer offered a potpourri of songs from many lands.
poultice N. soothing application applied to sore and inflamed portions of the body. She was advised to apply a flaxseed poultice to the inflammation.
practicable ADJ. feasible. The board of directors decided that the plan was practicable and agreed to undertake the project.
practical ADJ. based on experience; useful. He was a practical man, opposed to theory.
pragmatic   ADJ. practical (as opposed to idealistic); concerned with the practical worth or impact of something. This coming trip to France should provide me with a pragmatic test of the value of my conversational French class.
pragmatist N. practical person. No pragmatist enjoys becoming involved in a game that he can never win.
prate v. speak foolishly; boast idly. Let us not prate about our qualities; rather, let our virtues speak for themselves.
prattle v. babble. Baby John prattled on and on about the cats and his ball and the Cookie Monster, also N.
preamble   N. introductory statement. In the Preamble lo the Constitution, the purpose of the document is set forth.
precarious   ADJ. uncertain; risky. Saying the stock was currently overpriced and would be a precarious investment, the broker advised her client against purchasing it.
precedent N. something preceding in time that may be used as an authority or guide for future action; an earlier occurrence. The law professor asked Jill to state which famous case served as a precedent for the court's decision in Brown II. precede, v.
precedent ADJ. preceding in time, rank, etc. Our discussions, precedent to this event, certainly did not give you any reason to believe that we would adopt your proposal.
precept N. practical rule guiding conduct. "Love thy neighbor as thyself" is a worthwhile precept.
precipice N. cliff; dangerous position. Suddenly Indiana Jones found himself dangling from the edge of a precipice.
precipitant N. something that causes a substance in a chemical solution to separate out in solid form. Solvents by definition dissolve; precipitants, however, cause solids to precipitate or form, precipitate, v.
precipitate   ADJ.  rash;  premature;  hasty;  sudden. Though I was angry enough to resign on the spot, I had enough sense to keep myself from quitting a job in such a precipitate fashion.
precipitate v. throw headlong; hasten. The removal of American political support appeared to have precipitated the downfall of the Marcos regime.
precipitous ADJ. steep; overhasty. This hill is difficult to climb because it is so precipitous; one slip, and our descent will be precipitous as well.
precis N. concise summing up of main points. Before making her presentation at the conference, Ellen wrote a neat precis of the major elements she would cover.
precise ADJ. exact. If you don't give me precise directions and a map, I'll never find your place.
preclude v. make impossible; eliminate. The fact that the band was already booked to play in Hollywood on New Year's Eve precluded their accepting the offer of a New Year's Eve gig in London.
precocious ADJ. advanced in development. Listening to the grown-up way the child discussed serious topics, we couldn't help remarking how precocious she was. precocity, N.
precursor   N. forerunner. Though Gray and  Burns share many traits with the Romantic poets who followed them,   most  critics  consider them  precursors of the Romantic Movement, not true Romantics.
predator N. creature that seizes and devours another animal; person who robs or exploits others. Not just cats, but a wide variety of predators owls, hawks, weasels, foxes catch mice for dinner. A carnivore is by definition predatory, for he preys on weaker creatures, predation, N.
predecessor N. former occupant of a post. I hope I can live up to the fine example set by my late predecessor in this office.
predetermine v. predestine; settle or decide beforehand; influence markedly. Romeo and Juliet believed that Fate had predetermined their meeting. Bea gathered estimates from caterers, florists, and stationers so that she could predetermine the costs of holding a catered buffet. Philip's love of athletics predetermined his choice of a career in sports marketing.
predicament N. tricky or dangerous situation; dilemma. Tied to the railroad tracks by the villain, Pauline strained against her bonds. How would she escape from this terrible predicament
predilection N. partiality; preference. Although the artist used various media from time to time, she had a predilection for watercolors.
predispose v. give an inclination toward; make susceptible to. Oleg's love of dressing up his big sister's Barbie doll may have predisposed him to become a fashion designer. Genetic influences apparently predispose people to certain forms of cancer, predisposition, N.
preeminent ADJ. outstanding; superior. The king traveled to Boston because he wanted the preeminent surgeon in the field to perform the operation.
preempt v. head off; forestall by acting first; appropriate for oneself; supplant. Hoping to preempt any attempts by the opposition to make educational reform a hot political issue, the candidate set out her own plan to revitalize the public schools, preemptive, ADJ.
preen v. make oneself tidy in appearance; feel self-satisfaction. As Kitty preened before the mirror, carefully smoothing her shining hair, she couldn't help preening herself on her good looks.
prefatory ADJ. introductory. The chairman made a few prefatory remarks before he called on the first speaker.
prehensile ADJ. capable of grasping or holding. Monkeys use not only their arms and legs but also their prehensile tails in traveling through the trees.
prelate N. church dignitary. The archbishop of Moscow and other high-ranking prelates visited the Russian Orthodox seminary.
prelude N. introduction; forerunner. I am afraid that this border raid is the prelude to more serious attacks.
premeditate v. plan in advance. She had premeditated the murder for months, reading about common poisons and buying weed killer that contained arsenic.
premise N. assumption; postulate. On the premise that there's no fool like an old fool, P. T. Barnum hired a 90-year-old clown for his circus.
premonition N. forewarning. We ignored these premonitions of disaster because they appeared to be based on childish fears.
premonitory ADJ. serving to warn. You should have visited a doctor as soon as you felt these premonitory chest pains.
preponderance N. superiority of power, quantity, etc. The rebels sought to overcome the preponderance of strength of the government forces by engaging in guerrilla tactics, preponderate, v. preponderant, ADJ.
preposterous ADJ. absurd; ridiculous. When the candidate tried to downplay his youthful experiments with marijuana by saying he hadn't inhaled, we all thought, "What a preposterous excuse!"
prerogative N. privilege; unquestionable right. The President cannot levy taxes; that is the prerogative of the legislative branch of government.
presage v. foretell. The vultures flying overhead presaged the discovery of the corpse in the desert.
prescience N. ability to foretell the future. Given the current wave of Japan-bashing, it does not take prescience for me to foresee problems in our future trade relations with Japan.
presentiment N. feeling something will happen; anticipatory fear; premonition. Saying goodbye at the airport, Jack had a sudden presentiment that this was the last time he would see Jill.
prestige N. impression produced by achievements or reputation. Many students want to go to Harvard University, not for the education offered, but for the prestige of Harvard's name, prestigious, ADJ.
presumptuous   ADJ. arrogant; taking liberties. It seems presumptuous for one so relatively new to the field to challenge the conclusions of its leading experts, presumption, N.
pretentious ADJ. ostentatious; pompous; making unjustified claims; overambitious. The other prize winner isn't wearing her medal; isn't it a bit pretentious of you to wear yours?
preternatural ADJ. beyond that which is normal in nature. John's mother's total ability to tell when he was lying struck him as almost preternatural.
pretext N. excuse. She looked for a good pretext to get out of paying a visit to her aunt.
prevail v. induce; triumph over. He tried to prevail on her to type his essay for him.
prevalent ADJ. widespread; generally accepted. A radical committed to social change, Reed had no patience with the conservative views prevalent in the America of his day.
prevaricate   v. lie. Some people believe that to prevaricate in a good cause is justifiable and regard the statement as a "white lie."
prey N. target of a hunt; victim. In Stalking the Wild Asparagus, Euell Gibbons has as his prey not wild beasts but wild plants, also v.
prim ADJ. very precise and formal; exceedingly proper. Many people commented on the contrast between the prim attire of the young lady and the inappropriate clothing worn by her escort.
primogeniture N. seniority by birth. By virtue of primogeniture, in some cultures the first-born child has many privileges denied his brothers and sisters.
primordial ADJ. existing at the beginning (of time); rudimentary. The Neanderthal Man is one of our primordial ancestors.
primp v. groom oneself with care; adorn oneself. The groom stood by idly while his nervous bride-to-be primped one last time before the mirror.
pristine   ADJ. characteristic of earlier times; primitive, unspoiled. This area has been preserved in all its pristine wildness.
privation N. hardship; want. In his youth, he knew hunger and privation.
privy ADJ. secret; hidden; not public. We do not care for privy chamber government.
probe v. explore with tools. The surgeon probed the wound for foreign matter before suturing it. also N.
probity   N. uprightness; incorruptibility. Everyone took his  probity for  granted;   his  defalcations,  therefore, shocked us all.
problematic   ADJ.  doubtful;  unsettled;  questionable; perplexing. Given the way building costs have exceeded estimates for the job, whether the arena will ever be completed is problematic.
proclivity N. inclination; natural tendency. Watching the two-year-old voluntarily put away his toys, I was amazed by his proclivity tor neatness.
procrastinate v. postpone; delay or put off. Looking at four years of receipts and checks he still had to sort through, Bob was truly sorry he had procrastinated tor so long and had not finished filing his taxes long ago.
procurement N. obtaining. The personnel department handles the procurement of new employees.
prod v. poke; stir up; urge. If you prod him hard enough, he'll eventually clean his room.
prodigal   ADJ. wasteful; reckless with money. Don't be so prodigal spending my money; when you've earned some money, you can waste as much of it as you want! also N.
prodigious ADJ. marvelous; enormous. Watching the champion weight lifter heave the weighty barbell to shoulder height and then boost it overhead, we marveled at his prodigious strength.
prodigy N. highly gifted child; marvel. Menuhin was a prodigy, performing wonders on his violin when he was barely eight years old.
profane v. violate; desecrate; treat unworthily. The members of the mysterious Far Eastern cult sought to kill the British explorer because he had profaned the sanctity of their holy goblet by using it as an ashtray, also ADJ.
profligate ADJ. dissipated; wasteful; wildly immoral. Although surrounded by wild and profligate companions, she managed to retain some sense of decency, also N. profligacy, N.
profound   ADJ. deep; not superficial; complete. Freud's remarkable insights into human behavior caused his fellow scientists to honor him as a profound thinker, profundity, N.
profusion N. overabundance; lavish expenditure; excess. Freddy was so overwhelmed by the profusion of choices on the menu that he knocked over his wine glass and soaked his host. He made profuse apologies to his host, the waiter, the busboy, the people at the next table, and the man in the men's room giving out paper towels.
progenitor N. ancestor. The Roth family, whose progenitors emigrated from Germany early in the nineteenth century, settled in Peru, Illinois.
progeny N. children; offspring. He was proud of his progeny but regarded George as the most promising of all his children.
prognosis N. forecasted course of a disease; prediction. If the doctor's prognosis is correct, the patient will be in a coma for at least twenty-four hours.
prognosticate v. predict. I prognosticate disaster unless we change our wasteful ways.
prohibitive   ADJ. tending to prevent the purchase or use of something; inclined to prevent or forbid. Susie wanted to buy a new Volvo but had to settle for a used Dodge because the new car's price was prohibitive. prohibition, N.
projectile N. missile. Man has always hurled projectiles at his enemy whether in the form of stones or of highly explosive shells.
proletarian N. member of the working class; blue collar guy. "Workers of the world, unite! You have nothing to lose but your chains" is addressed to proletarians, not preppies, also ADJ. proletariat, N.
proliferate   v. grow rapidly; spread; multiply. Times of economic hardship inevitably encourage countless get-rich-quick schemes to proliferate, proliferation, N.
prolific ADJ. abundantly fruitful. She was a prolific writer who produced as many as three books a year.
prolixity N. tedious wordiness; verbosity. A writer who suffers from prolixity tells his readers everything they never wanted to know about his subject (or were too bored to ask), prolix, ADJ.
prologue N. introduction (to a poem or play). In the prologue to Romeo and Juliet, Shakespeare introduces the audience to the feud between the Montagues and the Capulets.
prolong v. extend; draw out; lengthen. In their determination to discover ways to prolong human life, doctors fail to take into account that longer lives are not always happier ones.
prominent ADJ. conspicuous; notable; protruding. Have you ever noticed that Prince Charles's prominent ears make him resemble the big-eared character in Mad comics?
promiscuous ADJ. mixed indiscriminately; haphazard; irregular, particularly sexually. In the opera La Boheme, we get a picture of the promiscuous life led by the young artists of Paris, promiscuity, N.
promontory N. headland. They erected a lighthouse on the promontory to warn approaching ships of their nearness to the shore.
promote v. help to flourish; advance in rank; publicize. Founder of the Children's Defense Fund, Marian Wright Edelman ceaselessly promotes the welfare of young people everywhere.
prompt v. cause; provoke; provide a cue for an actor. Whatever prompted you to ask for such a big piece of cake when you're on a diet?
promulgate v. proclaim a doctrine or law; make known by official publication. When Moses came down from the mountaintop prepared to promulgate God's commandments, he was appalled to discover his followers worshipping a golden calf.
prone ADJ. inclined to; prostrate. She was prone to sudden fits of anger during which she would lie prone on the floor, screaming and kicking her heels.
propagate v. multiply; spread. Since bacteria propagate more quickly in unsanitary environments, it is important to keep hospital rooms clean.
propellant N. substance that propels or drives forward. The development of our missile program has forced our scientists to seek more powerful propellants. also ADJ.
propensity   N. natural inclination. Convinced of his own talent, Sol has an unfortunate propensity to belittle the talents of others.
prophetic ADJ. having to do with predicting the future. In interpreting Pharaoh's prophetic dream, Joseph said that the seven fat cows eaten by the seven lean cows represented seven years of plenty followed by seven years of famine, prophecy, N.
prophylactic ADJ. used to prevent disease. Despite all prophylactic measures introduced by the authorities, the epidemic raged until cool weather set in. prophylaxis, N.
propinquity N. nearness; kinship. Their relationship could not be explained as being based on mere propinquity. They were more than relatives; they were true friends.
propitiate   v. appease. The natives offered sacrifices to propitiate the gods.
propitious ADJ. favorable; fortunate; advantageous. Chloe consulted her horoscope to see whether Tuesday would be a propitious day to dump her boyfriend.
proponent N. supporter; backer; opposite of opponent. In the Senate, proponents of the universal health care measure lobbied to gain additional support for the controversial legislation.
propound v. put forth for analysis. In your discussion, you have propounded several questions; let us consider each one separately.
propriety   N. fitness; correct conduct. Miss Manners counsels her readers so that they may behave with propriety in any social situation and not embarrass themselves.
propulsive ADJ. driving forward. The jet plane has a greater propulsive power than the engine-driven plane.
prosaic ADJ. dull and unimaginative; matter-of-fact; factual. Though the ad writers had come up with a highly creative campaign to publicize the company's newest product, the head office rejected it for a more prosaic, down-to-earth approach.
proscenium N. part of stage in front of curtain. In the theater-in-the-round there can be no proscenium or proscenium arch, also ADJ.
proscribe   v.   ostracize;   banish;   outlaw.   Antony, Octavius, and Lepidus proscribed all those who had conspired against Julius Caesar.
proselytize v. induce someone to convert to a religion or belief. In these interfaith meetings, there must be no attempt to proselytize; we must respect all points of view.
prosody N. the art of versification. This book on prosody contains a rhyming dictionary as well as samples of the various verse forms.
prosperity N. good fortune; financial success; physical well-being. Promising to stay together "for richer, for poorer," the newlyweds vowed to be true to one another in prosperity and hardship alike.
prostrate v. stretch out full on ground. He prostrated himself before the idol, also ADJ.
protean ADJ. versatile; able to take on many forms. A remarkably protean actor, Alec Guinness could take on any role.
protege N. person receiving protection and support from a patron. Born with an independent spirit, Cyrano de Bergerac refused to be a protege of Cardinal Richelieu.
protocol N. diplomatic etiquette. We must run this state dinner according to protocol if we are to avoid offending any of our guests.
prototype N. original work used as a model by others. The crude typewriter on display in this museum is the prototype of the elaborate machines in use today.
protract v. prolong. Seeking to delay the union members' vote, the management team tried to protract the negotiations endlessly, but the union representatives saw through their strategy.
protrude v. stick out. His fingers protruded from the holes in his gloves.
protuberance N. protrusion; bulge. A ganglionic cyst is a fluid-filled tumor (generally benign) that develops near a joint membrane or tendon sheath, and that bulges beneath the skin, forming a protuberance.
provenance N. origin or source of something. I am not interested in its provenance; I am more concerned with its usefulness than with its source.
provender N. dry food; fodder. I am not afraid of a severe winter because I have stored a large quantity of provender tor the cattle.
provident ADJ. displaying foresight; thrifty; preparing for emergencies. In his usual provident manner, he had insured himself against this type of loss.
provincial ADJ. pertaining to a province; limited in outlook; unsophisticated. As provincial governor, Sir Henry administered the Queen's law in his remote corner of Canada. Caught up in local problems, out of touch with London news, he became sadly provincial.
provisional ADJ. tentative. Kim's acceptance as an American Express cardholder was provisional: before issuing her a card, American Express wanted to check her employment record and credit history.
proviso N. stipulation. I am ready to accept your proposal with the proviso that you meet your obligations within the next two weeks.
provocative ADJ. arousing anger or interest; annoying. In a typically provocative act, the bully kicked sand into the weaker man's face, provoke, v. provocation, N.
prowess N. extraordinary ability; military bravery. Performing triple axels and double lutzes at the age of six, the young figure skater was world famous for her prowess on the ice.
proximity N. nearness. Blind people sometimes develop a compensatory ability to sense the proximity of objects around them.
proxy N. authorized agent. Please act as my proxy and vote for this slate of candidates in my absence.
prude N. excessively modest or proper person. The X-rated film was definitely not for prudes.
prudent ADJ. cautious; careful. A miser hoards money not because he is prudent but because he is greedy, prudence, N.
prune v. cut away; trim. With the help of her editor, she was able to prune her manuscript into publishable form.
prurient ADJ. having or causing lustful thoughts and desires. Aroused by his prurient impulses, the dirty old man leered at the sweet young thing and offered to give her a sample of his "prowess"; his prurience appalled her.
pry v. inquire impertinently; use leverage to raise or open something. Though Nora claimed she didn't mean to pry, everyone knew she was just plain nosy. With a crowbar Long John Silver pried up the lid of the treasure chest.
pseudonym N. pen name. Samuel Clemens' pseudonym was Mark Twain.
psyche N. soul; mind. It is difficult to delve into the psyche of a human being.
psychiatrist N. a doctor who treats mental diseases. A psychiatrist often needs long conferences with his patient before a diagnosis can be made.
psychopathic ADJ. pertaining to mental derangement. The psychopathic patient suffers more frequently from a disorder of the nervous system than from a diseased brain.
psychosis N. mental disorder. We must endeavor to find an outlet for the patient's repressed desires if we hope to combat this psychosis, psychotic, ADJ.
pterodactyl N. extinct flying reptile. The remains of pterodactyls indicate that these flying reptiles had a wingspan of as much as twenty feet.
puerile ADJ. childish. His puerile pranks sometimes offended his more mature friends.
pugilist N. boxer. The famous pugilist Cassius Clay changed his name to Muhammed Ali.
pugnacity N. combativeness; disposition to fight. "Put up your dukes!" he cried, making a fist to show his pugnacity, pugnacious, ADJ.
puissant ADJ. powerful; strong; potent. We must keep his friendship for he will make a puissant ally.
pulchritude N. beauty; comeliness. I do not envy the judges who have to select this year's Miss America from this collection of female pulchritude.
pulmonary ADJ. pertaining to the lungs. In his researches on pulmonary diseases, he discovered many facts about the lungs of animals and human beings.
pulsate v. throb. We could see the blood vessels in his temple pulsate as he became more angry.
pulverize v. crush or grind into very small particles. Before sprinkling the dried herbs into the stew, Michael first pulverized them into a fine powder.
pummel v. beat or pound with fists. Swinging wildly, Pammy pummeled her brother around the head and shoulders.
punctilious ADJ. stressing niceties of conduct or form; minutely attentive (perhaps too much so) to fine points. Percy is punctilious about observing the rules of etiquette whenever Miss Manners invites him to stay, punctiliousness, N.
pundit N. authority on a subject; learned person; expert. Some authors who write about the GRE as if they are pundits actually know very little about the test.
pungent ADJ. stinging; sharp in taste or smell; caustic. The pungent odor of ripe Limburger cheese appealed to Simone but made Stanley gag. pungency, N.
punitive ADJ. punishing. He asked for punitive measures against the offender.
puny ADJ. insignificant; tiny; weak. Our puny efforts to stop the flood were futile.
purchase N. firm grasp or footing. The mountaineer struggled to get a proper purchase on the slippery rock.
purgatory N. place of spiritual expiation. In this purgatory, he could expect no help from his comrades.
purge v. remove or get rid of something unwanted; free from blame or guilt; cleanse or purify. The Communist government purged the party to get rid of members suspected of capitalist sympathies, sending those believed to be disloyal to labor camps in Siberia, also N.
purport N. intention; meaning. If the purport of your speech was to arouse the rabble, you succeeded admirably, also v.
purported ADJ. alleged; claimed; reputed or rumored. The purported Satanists sacrificing live roosters in the park turned out to be a party of Shriners holding a chicken barbecue.
purse v. pucker; contract into wrinkles. Miss Watson pursed her lips to show her disapproval of Huck's bedraggled appearance.
purveyor N. furnisher of foodstuffs; caterer. As purveyor of rare wines and viands, he traveled through France and Italy every year in search of new products to sell.
pusillanimous ADJ. cowardly; fainthearted. You should be ashamed of your pusillanimous conduct during this dispute, pusillanimity, N.
putative ADJ. supposed; reputed. Although there are some doubts, the putative author of this work is Massinger.
putrid ADJ. foul; rotten; decayed. When the doctor removed the bandages, the putrid smell indicated that the wound had turned gangrenous, putrescence, putrefaction, N.
pylon N. marking post to guide aviators; steel tower supporting cables or telephone lines. Amelia Earhart carefully banked her airplane as she followed the line of pylons set up to mark the course of the Great Plane Race.
pyromaniac N. person with an insane desire to set things on fire. The detectives searched the area for the pyromaniac who had set these costly fires.
