quack N. charlatan; impostor. Do not be misled by the exorbitant claims of this quack; he cannot cure you.
quadruped N. four-footed animal. Most mammals are quadrupeds.
quaff v. drink with relish. As we quaffed our ale, we listened to the gay songs of the students in the tavern.
quagmire N. soft, wet, boggy land; complex or dangerous situation from which it is difficult to free oneself. Up to her knees in mud, Myra wondered how on earth she was going to extricate herself from this quagmire.
quail v. cower; lose heart. He was afraid that he would quail in the face of danger.
quaint ADJ. odd; old-fashioned; picturesque. Her quaint clothes and old-fashioned language marked her as an eccentric.
qualified ADJ. limited; restricted. Unable to give the candidate full support, the mayor gave him only a qualified endorsement, (secondary meaning)
qualms N. misgivings; uneasy fears, especially about matters of conscience. I have no qualms about giving this assignment to Helen; I know she will handle it admirably.
quandary N. dilemma. When both Harvard and Stanford accepted Laura, she was in a quandary as to which school she should attend.
quarantine N. isolation of a person, place, or ship to prevent spread of infection. We will have to place this house under quarantine until we determine the exact nature of the disease, also v.
quarry N. victim; object of a hunt. The police closed in on their quarry.
quarry v. dig into. They quarried blocks of marble out of the hillside.
quash v. subdue; crush; squash. The authorities acted quickly to quash the student rebellion, sending in tanks to cow the demonstrators.
quay N. dock; landing place. Because of the captain's carelessness, the ship crashed into the quay.
queasy ADJ. easily nauseated; squeamish. Remember that great chase movie, the one with the carsick passenger? That's right: Queasy Rider
quell v. extinguish; put down; quiet. Miss Minchin's demeanor was so stern and forbidding that she could quell any unrest among her students with one intimidating glance.
quench v. douse or extinguish; assuage or satisfy. What's the favorite song of the Fire Department? "Baby, Quench My Fire!" After Bob ate the heavily salted popcorn, he had to drink a pitcherful of water to quench his thirst.
querulous ADJ. fretful; whining. Even the most agreeable toddlers can begin to act querulous if they miss their nap.
query N. inquiry; question. In her column "Ask Beth," the columnist invites young readers to send their queries about life and love to her. also v.
queue N. line. They stood patiently in the queue outside the movie theatre.
quibble   N. minor objection or complaint. Aside from a few hundred teensy-weensy quibbles about the set, the script, the actors, the director, the costumes, the lighting, and the props, the hypercritical critic loved the play, also v.
quiescent   ADJ. at rest; dormant; temporarily inactive. After the devastating eruption, fear of Mount Etna was great; people did not return to cultivate its rich hillside lands until the volcano had been quiescent for a full two years, quiescence, N.
quietude N. tranquillity. He was impressed by the air of quietude and peace that pervaded the valley.
quintessence N. purest and highest embodiment. Noel Coward displayed the quintessence of wit.
quip N. taunt. You are unpopular because you are too free with your quips and sarcastic comments, also v.
quirk N. startling twist; caprice, By a quirk of fate, he found himself working for the man whom he had discharged years before.
quisling N. traitor who aids invaders. In his conquest of Europe, Hitler was aided by the quislings who betrayed their own people and served in the puppet governments established by the Nazis.
quiver N. case for arrows. Robin Hood reached back and plucked one last arrow from his quiver, (secondary meaning)
quiver v. tremble; shake. The bird dog's nose twitched and his whiskers quivered as he strained eagerly against the leash, also N.
quixotic ADJ. idealistic but impractical. Constantly coming up with quixotic, unworkable schemes to save the world, Simon has his heart in the right place, but his head is somewhere off in the clouds.
quizzical ADJ. teasing; bantering; mocking; curious. When the skinny teenager tripped over his own feet stepping into the bullpen, Coach raised one quizzical eyebrow, shook his head, and said, "Okay, kid. You're here; let's see what you've got."
quorum N. number of members necessary to conduct a meeting. The senator asked for a roll call to determine whether a quorum was present.
quotidian ADJ. daily; commonplace; customary. To Philip, each new day of his internship was filled with excitement; he could not dismiss his rounds as merely quotidian routine.
