
rabid ADJ. like a fanatic; furious. He was a rabid follower of the Dodgers and watched them play whenever he could go to the ballpark.
raconteur N. story-teller. My father was a gifted raconteur with an unlimited supply of anecdotes.
ragamuffin N. person wearing tattered clothes. He felt sorry for the ragamuffin who was begging for food and gave him money to buy a meal.
rail v. scold; rant. You may rail at him all you want; you will never change him.
raiment N. clothing. "How can I go to the ball?" asked Cinderella. "I have no raiment ill to wear."
rakish ADJ. stylish; sporty. He wore his hat at a rakish and jaunty angle.
rally v. call up or summon (forces, vital powers, etc.); revive or recuperate. Washington quickly rallied his troops to fight off the British attack. The patient had been sinking throughout the night, but at dawn she rallied and made a complete recovery, also N.
ramble v. wander aimlessly (physically or mentally). Listening to the teacher ramble, Judy wondered whether he'd ever get to his point, also N.
ramification N. branching out; subdivision. We must examine all the ramifications of this problem.
ramify v. divide into branches or subdivisions. When the plant begins to ramify, it is advisable to nip off most of the new branches.
ramp N. slope; inclined plane. The house was built with ramps instead of stairs in order to enable the man in the wheelchair to move easily from room to room and floor to floor.
rampant ADJ. growing in profusion; unrestrained. The rampant weeds in the garden choked the asters and marigolds until the flowers died, rampancy, N.
rampart N. defensive mound of earth. "From the ramparts we watched" as the fighting continued.
ramshackle ADJ. rickety; falling apart. The boys propped up the ramshackle clubhouse with a couple of boards.
rancid ADJ. having the odor of stale fat. A rancid odor filled the ship's galley and nauseated the crew.
rancor N. bitterness; hatred. Thirty years after the war, she could not let go of the past but was still consumed with rancor against the foe. rancorous, ADJ.
random ADJ. without definite purpose, plan, or aim; haphazard. Although the sponsor of the raffle claimed all winners were chosen at random, people had their suspicions when the grand prize went to the sponsor's brother-in-law.
rankle v. irritate; fester. The memory of having been jilted rankled him for years.
rant v. rave; talk excitedly; scold; make a grandiloquent speech. When he heard that I'd totaled the family car, Dad began to rant at me like a complete madman.
rapacious ADJ. excessively grasping; plundering. Hawks and other rapacious birds prey on a variety of small animals.
rapport N. emotional closeness; harmony. In team teaching, it is important that all teachers in the group have good rapport with one another.
rapt ADJ. absorbed; enchanted. Caught up in the wonder of the storyteller's tale, the rapt listeners sat motionless, hanging on his every word.
rarefied ADJ. made less dense [of a gas]. The mountain climbers had difficulty breathing in the rarefied atmosphere, rarefy, v. rarefaction, N.
raspy ADJ. grating; harsh. The sergeant's raspy voice grated on the recruits' ears.
ratify v. approve formally; confirm; verify. Party leaders doubted that they had enough votes in both houses of Congress to ratify the constitutional amendment.
ratiocination N. reasoning; act of drawing conclusions from premises. While Watson was a man of average intelligence, Holmes was a genius, whose gift for ratiocination made him a superb detective.
rationale N. fundamental reason or justification; grounds for an action. Her need for a vehicle large enough to accommodate five children and a Saint Bernard was Judy's rationale for buying a minivan.
rationalize v. give a plausible reason for an action in place of a true, less admirable one; offer an excuse. When David refused gabby Gabrielle a ride to the dance because, he said, he had no room in the car, he was rationalizing; actually, he couldn't stand being cooped up in a car with anyone who talked as much as she did. rationalization, N.
raucous ADJ. harsh and shrill; disorderly and boisterous. The raucous crowd of New Year's Eve revelers grew progressively noisier as midnight drew near.
ravage v. plunder; despoil. The marauding army ravaged new countryside.
rave N. overwhelmingly favorable review. Though critic John Simon seldom has a good word to say about contemporary plays, his review of All in the Timing was a total rave.
ravel v. fall apart into tangles; unravel or untwist; entangle. A single thread pulled loose, and the entire scarf started to ravel.
ravenous ADJ. extremely hungry. The ravenous dog upset several garbage pails in its search for food.
ravine N. narrow valley with steep sides. Steeper. than a gully, less precipitous than a canyon, a ravine is, like them, the product of years of erosion.
raze v. destroy completely. Spelling matters: to raise a building is to put it up; to raze a building is to tear it down.
reactionary ADJ. opposing progress; politically ultracon-servative. Opposing the use of English in worship services, reactionary forces in the church fought to reinstate the mass in Latin, also N.
realm N. kingdom; field or sphere. In the animal realm, the lion is the king of beasts.
reaper N. one who harvests grain. Death, the Grim Reaper, cuts down mortal men and women, just as a farmer cuts down the ripened grain.
rebate N. discount. We offer a rebate of ten percent to those who pay cash.
rebuff v. snub; beat back. She rebuffed his invitation so smoothly that he did not realize he had been snubbed, also N.
rebuke v. scold harshly; criticize severely. No matter how sharply Miss Watson rebuked Huck for his misconduct, he never talked back but just stood there like a stump, also N.
rebus N. puzzle in which pictures stand for words. A coven of witches beside a tree is a possible rebus for the town Coventry.
rebuttal N. refutation; response with contrary evidence. The defense lawyer confidently listened to the prosecutor sum up his case, sure that she could answer his arguments in her rebuttal.
recalcitrant   ADJ. obstinately stubborn; determined to resist authority; unruly. Which animal do you think is more recalcitrant, a pig or a mule?
recant   v. disclaim or disavow; retract a previous statement; openly confess error. Hoping to make Joan of Arc recant her sworn testimony, her English captors tried to convince her that her visions had been sent to her by the Devil.
recapitulate v. summarize. Let us recapitulate what has been said thus far before going ahead.
recast v. reconstruct (a sentence, story, etc.); fashion again. Let me recast this sentence in terms your feeble brain can grasp: in words of one syllable, you are a fool.
receptive ADJ. quick or willing to receive ideas, suggestions, etc. Adventure-loving Huck Finn proved a receptive audience for Tom's tales of buried treasure and piracy.
recession N. withdrawal; retreat; time of low economic activity. The slow recession of the flood waters created problems for the crews working to restore power to the area.
recidivism N. habitual return to crime. Prison reformers in the United States are disturbed by the high rate of recidivism; the number of persons serving second and third terms indicates the failure of the prisons to rehabilitate the inmates.
recipient N. receiver. Although he had been the recipient of many favors, he was not grateful to his benefactor.
reciprocal ADJ. mutual; exchangeable; interacting. The two nations signed a reciprocal trade agreement.
reciprocate v. repay in kind. If they attack us, we shall be compelled to reciprocate and bomb their territory, reciprocity, N.
recluse   N. hermit; loner. Disappointed in love, Miss Emily became a recluse; she shut herself away in her empty mansion and refused to see another living soul, reclusive, ADJ.
reconcile v. correct inconsistencies; become friendly after a quarrel. Every time we try to reconcile our checkbook with the bank statement, we quarrel. However, despite these monthly lovers' quarrels, we always manage to reconcile.
recondite   ADJ. abstruse; profound; secret. He read many recondite books in order to obtain the material for his scholarly thesis.
reconnaissance N. survey of enemy by soldiers; reconnoitering. If you encounter any enemy soldiers during your reconnaissance, capture them for questioning.
recount v. narrate or tell; count over again. About to recount the latest adventure of Sherlock Holmes, Watson lost track of exactly how many cases Holmes had solved and refused to begin his tale until he'd recounted them one by one.
recourse N. resorting to help when in trouble. The boy's only recourse was to appeal to his father for aid.
recrimination N. countercharges. Loud and angry recriminations were her answer to his accusations.
rectify v. set right; correct. You had better send a check to rectify your account before American Express cancels your credit card.
rectitude N. uprightness; moral virtue; correctness of judgment. The Eagle Scout was a model of rectitude; smugness was the only flaw he needed to correct.
recumbent ADJ. reclining; lying down completely or in part. The command "AT EASE" does not permit you to take a recumbent position.
recuperate v. recover. The doctors were worried because the patient did not recuperate as rapidly as they had expected.
recurrent ADJ. occurring again and again. These recurrent attacks disturbed us and we consulted a physician.
redolent ADJ. fragrant; odorous; suggestive of an odor. Even though it is February, the air is redolent of spring.
redoubtable   ADJ. formidable;  causing fear.  During the Cold War period, neighboring countries tried not to offend the Russians because they could be redoubtable foes, redress   N. remedy; compensation. Do you mean to tell me that I can get no redress for my injuries? also v.
redundant ADJ. superfluous; repetitious; excessively wordy. The bottle of wine I brought to Bob's party was certainly redundant how was I to know Bob owned a winery? In your essay, you repeat several points unnecessarily; try to avoid redundancy in the future.
reek v. emit (odor). The room reeked with stale tobacco smoke, also N.
refectory N. dining hall. In this huge refectory, we can feed the entire student body at one sitting.
refraction N. bending of a ray of light. When you look at a stick inserted in water, it looks bent because of the refraction of the light by the water.
refractory   ADJ. stubborn; unmanageable. The refractory horse was eliminated from the race when he refused to obey the jockey.
refrain v. abstain from; resist. N. chorus. Whenever he heard a song with a lively chorus, Sol could never refrain from joining in on the refrain.
refulgent ADJ. brightly shining; gleaming. The squire polished the knight's armor until it gleamed in the light like the refulgent moon.
refurbish v. renovate; make bright by polishing. The flood left a deposit of mud on everything; it was necessary to refurbish our belongings.
refute   v.  disprove.  The  defense  called  several respectable witnesses who were able to refute the false testimony of the prosecution's only witness, refutation, N.
regal   ADJ. royal. Prince Albert had a regal manner.
regale v. entertain. John regaled us with tales of his adventures in Africa.
regatta N. boat or yacht race. Many boating enthusiasts followed the regatta in their own yachts.
regeneration N. spiritual rebirth. Modern penologists strive for the regeneration of the prisoners.
regicide N. murder of a king or queen. The beheading of Mary Queen of Scots was an act of regicide.
regime N. method or system of government. When a Frenchman mentions the Old Regime, he refers to the government existing before the revolution.
regimen N. prescribed diet and habits. I doubt whether the results warrant our living under such a strict regimen.
rehabilitate v. restore to proper condition. We must rehabilitate those whom we send to prison.
reimburse v. repay. Let me know what you have spent and I will reimburse you.
reiterate v. repeat. She reiterated the warning to make sure everyone understood it.
rejoinder N. retort; comeback; reply. When someone has been rude to me, I find it particularly satisfying to come up with a quick rejoinder.
rejuvenate v. make young again. The charlatan claimed that his elixir would rejuvenate the aged and weary.
relegate v. banish to an inferior position; delegate; assign. After Ralph dropped his second tray of drinks that week, the manager swiftly relegated him to a minor post cleaning up behind the bar.
relent v. give in. When her stern father would not relent and allow her to marry Robert Browning, Elizabeth Barrett eloped with her suitor, relentless, ADJ.
relevant ADJ. pertinent; referring to the case in hand. Teri was impressed by how relevant Virginia Woolf's remarks were to her as a woman writer; it was as if Woolf had been writing with Teri's situation in mind, relevance, N. relevancy, N.
relic N. surviving remnant; memento. Egypt's Department of Antiquities prohibits tourists from taking mummies and other ancient relics out of the country. Mike keeps his photos of his trip to Egypt in a box with other relics of his travels.
relinquish v. give up something with reluctance; yield. Once you get used to fringe benefits like expense-account meals and a company car, it's very hard to relinquish them.
relish v. savor; enjoy. Watching Peter enthusiastically chow down, I thought, "Now there's a man who relishes a good dinner!" also N.
remediable ADJ. reparable. Let us be grateful that the damage is remediable.
reminiscence N. recollection. Her reminiscences of her experiences are so fascinating that she ought to write a book.
remiss ADJ. negligent. When the prisoner escaped, the guard was accused of being remiss in his duty.
remission N. temporary moderation of disease symptoms; cancellation of a debt; forgiveness or pardon. Though Senator Tsongas had been treated for cancer, his symptoms were in remission, and he was considered fit to handle the strains of a presidential race.
remnant N. remainder. I suggest that you wait until the store places the remnants of these goods on sale.
remonstrance N. protest; objection. The authorities were deaf to the pastor's remonstrances about the lack of police protection in the area, remonstrate, v.
remorse N. guilt; self-reproach. The murderer felt no remorse for his crime.
remunerative ADJ. compensating; rewarding. I find my new work so remunerative that I may not return to my previous employment, remuneration, N.
rend v. split; tear apart. In his grief, he tried to rend his garments, rent, N.
render v. deliver; provide; represent. He rendered aid to the needy and indigent.
rendezvous N. meeting place. The two fleets met at the rendezvous at the appointed time, also v.
rendition N. translation; artistic interpretation of a song, etc. The audience cheered enthusiastically as she completed her rendition of the aria.
renegade N. deserter; traitor. Because he had abandoned his post and joined forces with the Indians, his fellow officers considered the hero of Dances with Wolves a renegade, also ADJ.
renege v. deny; go back on. He reneged on paying off his debt.
renounce v. abandon; disown; repudiate. Even though she knew she would be burned at the stake as a witch, Joan of Arc refused to renounce her belief that her voices came from God. renunciation, N.
renovate v. restore to good condition; renew. They claim that they can renovate worn shoes so that they look like new ones.
renown N. fame. For many years an unheralded researcher, Barbara McClintock gained international renown when she won the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine, renowned, ADJ.
rent N. rip; split. Kit did an excellent job of mending the rent in the lining of her coat, rend, v.
reparable ADJ. capable of being repaired. Fortunately, the damages we suffered in the accident were reparable and our car looks brand new.
reparation N. amends; compensation. At the peace conference, the defeated country promised to pay reparations to the victors.
repartee N. clever reply. He was famous for his witty repartee and his sarcasm.
repast N. meal; feast; banquet. The caterers prepared a delicious repast for Fred and Judy's wedding day.
repeal v. revoke; annul. What would the effect on our society be if we decriminalized drug use by repealing the laws against the possession and sale of narcotics?
repel v. drive away; disgust. At first, the Beast's ferocious appearance repelled Beauty, but she came to love the tender heart hidden behind that beastly exterior.
repellent ADJ. driving away; unattractive. Mosquitoes find the odor so repellent that they leave any spot where this liquid has been sprayed, also N.
repercussion N. rebound; reverberation; reaction. I am afraid that this event will have serious repercussions.
repertoire N. list of works of music, drama, etc., a performer is prepared to present. The opera company decided to include Madame Butterfly in its repertoire for the following season.
repine v. fret; complain. There is no sense repining over the work you have left undone.
replenish v. fill up again. Before she could take another backpacking trip, Carla had to replenish her stock of freeze-dried foods.
replete ADJ. filled to the brim or to the point of being stuffed; abundantly supplied. The movie star's memoir was replete with juicy details about the love life of half of Hollywood.
replica N. copy. Are you going to hang this replica of the Declaration of Independence in the classroom or in the auditorium?
replicate v. reproduce; duplicate. Because he had always wanted a palace, Donald decided to replicate the Taj Mahal in miniature on his estate.
repository N. storehouse. Libraries are repositories of the world's best thoughts.
reprehensible ADJ. deserving blame. Shocked by the viciousness of the bombing, politicians of every party uniformly condemned the terrorists' reprehensible deed.
repress v. restrain; crush; oppress. Anne's parents tried to curb her impetuosity without repressing her boundless high spirits.
reprieve N. temporary stay. During the twenty-four-hour reprieve, the lawyers sought to make the stay of execution permanent, also v.
reprimand v. reprove severely; rebuke. Every time Ermengarde made a mistake in class, she was afraid that Miss Minchin would reprimand her and tell her father how badly she was doing in school, also N.
reprisal N. retaliation. I am confident that we are ready for any reprisals the enemy may undertake.
reprise N. musical repetition; repeat performance; recurrent action. We enjoyed the soprano's solo in Act I so much that we were delighted by its reprise in the finale. At Waterloo, it was not the effect of any one skirmish that exhausted Colonel Audley; rather, it was the cumulative effect of the constant reprises that left him spent.
reproach   v. express disapproval or disappointment. He never could do anything wrong without imagining how the look on his mother's face would reproach him afterwards, also N. reproachful, ADJ.
reprobate   N. person hardened in sin, devoid of a sense of decency. I cannot understand why he has so many admirers if he is the reprobate you say he is.
reprobation N. severe disapproval. The students showed their reprobation of his act by refusing to talk with him.
reprove v. censure; rebuke. Though Aunt Bea at times would reprove Opie for inattention in church, she believed he was at heart a God-fearing lad. reproof, N.
repudiate   v. disown; disavow. On separating from Tony, Tina announced that she would repudiate all debts incurred by her soon-to-be ex-husband.
repugnance N. loathing. She looked at the snake with repugnance.
repulsion N. distaste; act of driving back. Hating bloodshed, she viewed war with repulsion. Even defensive battles distressed her, for the repulsion of enemy forces is never accomplished bloodlessly. repulse, v.
reputable ADJ. respectable. If you want to buy antiques, look for a reputable dealer; far too many dealers today pass off fakes as genuine antiques.
reputed ADJ. supposed. He is the reputed father of the child, repute, v. repute, N.
requiem N. mass for the dead; dirge. They played Mozart's Requiem at the funeral.
requisite N. necessary requirement. Many colleges state that a student must offer three years of a language as a requisite for admission.
requite v. repay; revenge. The wretch requited his benefactors by betraying them.
rescind v. cancel. Because of the public outcry against the new taxes, the senator proposed a bill to rescind the unpopular financial measure.
resentment N. indignation; bitterness; displeasure. Not wanting to appear a sore loser, Bill tried to hide his resentment of Barry's success.
reserve N. self-control; formal but distant manner. Although some girls were attracted by Mark's reserve, Judy was put off by it, for she felt his aloofness indicated a lack of openness, reserved, ADJ.
residue N. remainder; balance. In his will, he requested that after payment of debts, taxes, and funeral expenses, the residue be given to his wife.
resignation N. patient submissiveness; statement that one is quitting a job. If Bob Cratchit had not accepted Scrooge's bullying with timid resignation, he might have gotten up the nerve to hand in his resignation, resigned, ADJ.
resilient ADJ. elastic; having the power of springing back. Highly resilient, steel makes excellent bedsprings. resilience, N.
resolution   N. determination. Nothing could shake his resolution to succeed despite all difficulties, resolute, ADJ.
resolve   N. determination; firmness of purpose. How dare you question my resolve to take up sky-diving! Of course I haven't changed my mind! also v.
resolve v. decide; settle; solve. Holmes resolved to travel to Bohemia to resolve the dispute between Irene Adler and the King.
resonant ADJ. echoing; resounding; deep and full in sound. The deep, resonant voice of the actor James Earl Jones makes him particularly effective when he appears on stage.
respiration N. breathing; exhalation. The doctor found that the patient's years of smoking had adversely affected both his lung capacity and his rate of respiration.
respite N. interval of relief; time for rest; delay in punishment. For David, the two weeks vacationing in New Zealand were a delightful respite from the pressures of his job.
resplendent ADJ. dazzling; glorious; brilliant. While all the adults were commenting how glorious the emperor looked in his resplendent new clothes, one little boy was heard to say, "But he's naked!"
responsiveness N. state of reacting readily to appeals, orders, etc. The audience cheered and applauded, delighting the performers by its responsiveness.
restitution N. reparation; indemnification. He offered to make restitution for the window broken by his son.
restive ADJ. restlessly impatient; obstinately resisting control. Waiting impatiently in line to see Santa Glaus, even the best-behaved children grow restive and start to fidget.
restraint N. moderation or self-control; controlling force; restriction. Show some restraint, young lady! Three desserts is quite enough!
resumption N. taking up again; recommencement. During the summer break, Don had not realized how much he missed university life: at the resumption of classes, however, he felt marked excitement and pleasure, resume, v.
resurge v. rise again; flow to and fro. It was startling to see the spirit of nationalism resurge as the Soviet Union disintegrated into a loose federation of ethnic and national groups, resurgence, N. resurgent, ADJ.
resuscitate v. revive. The lifeguard tried to resuscitate the drowned child by applying artificial respiration.
retain v. keep; employ. Fighting to retain his seat in Congress, Senator Foghorn retained a new manager to head his reelection campaign.
retaliation v. repayment in kind (usually for bad treatment). Because everyone knew the Princeton band had stolen Brown's mascot, the whole Princeton student body expected some sort of retaliation from Brown, retaliate, v.
retentive ADJ. holding; having a good memory. The pupil did not need to spend much time in study as he had a retentive mind.
reticent ADJ. reserved; uncommunicative; inclined to silence. Fearing his competitors might get advance word about his plans from talkative staff members, Hughes preferred reticent employees to loquacious ones, reticence, N.
retinue N. following; attendants. The queen's retinue followed her down the aisle.
retiring ADJ. modest; shy. Given Susan's retiring persoality, no one expected her to take up public speaking; surprisingly enough, she became a star of the school debate team.
retort N. quick, sharp reply. Even when it was advisable for her to keep her mouth shut, she was always ready with a retort, also v.
retract v. withdraw; take back. When I saw how Fred and his fraternity brothers had trashed the frat house, I decided to retract my offer to let them use our summer cottage for the weekend, retraction, N.
retrench v. cut down; economize. If they were to be able to send their children to college, they would have to retrench.
retribution N. vengeance; compensation; punishment for offenses. The evangelist maintained that an angry deity would exact retribution from the sinners.
retrieve v. recover; find and bring in. The dog was intelligent and quickly learned to retrieve the game killed by the hunter, retrieval, N.
retroactive ADJ. taking effect before its enactment (as a law) or imposition (as a tax). Because the new pension law was retroactive to the first of the year, even though Martha had retired in February she was eligible for the pension.
retrograde v. go backwards; degenerate. Instead of advancing, our civilization seems to have retrograded in ethics and culture, also ADJ.
retrospective ADJ. looking back on the past. The Museum of Graphic Arts is holding a retrospective showing of the paintings of Michael Whelan over the past two decades, also N. retrospection, N.
revelry N. boisterous merrymaking. New Year's Eve is a night of revelry.
reverberate v. echo; resound. The entire valley reverberated with the sound of the church bells.
reverent ADJ. respectful; worshipful. Though I bow my head in church and recite the prayers, sometimes I don't feel properly reverent, revere, v. reverence, N.
reverie N. daydream; musing. She was awakened from her reverie by the teacher's question.
revert v. relapse; backslide; turn back to. Most of the time Andy seemed sensitive and mature, but occasionally he would revert to his smart-alecky, macho, adolescent self, reversion, N.
revile v. attack with abusive language; vilify. Though most of his contemporaries reviled Captain Kidd as a notorious, bloody-handed pirate, some of his fellow merchant-captains believed him innocent of his alleged crimes.
revoke v. cancel; retract. Repeat offenders who continue to drive under the influence of alcohol face having their driver's licenses permanently revoked, revocation, N.
revulsion N. sudden violent change of feeling; negative reaction. Many people in this country who admired dictatorships underwent a revulsion when they realized what Hitler and Mussolini were trying to do.
rhapsodize v. to speak or write in an exaggeratedly enthusiastic manner. She greatly enjoyed her Hawaiian vacation and rhapsodized about it for weeks.
rhetoric N. art of effective communication; insincere or grandiloquent language. All writers, by necessity, must be skilled in rhetoric, rhetorical, ADJ.
ribald ADJ. wanton; profane. He sang a ribald song that offended many of the more prudish listeners, ribaldry, N.
riddle v. pierce with holes; permeate or spread throughout. With his machine gun, Tracy riddled the car with bullets till it looked like a slice of Swiss cheese. During the proofreaders' strike, the newspaper was riddle with typos.
rider N. amendment or clause added to a legislative bill. Senator Foghorn said he would support Senator Filibuster's tax reform bill only if Filibuster agreed to add an antipollution rider to the bill.
rife ADJ. abundant; current. In the face of the many rumors of scandal, which are rife at the moment, it is best to remain silent.
rift N. opening; break. The plane was lost in the stormy sky until the pilot saw the city through a rift in the clouds.
rig v. fix or manipulate. The ward boss was able to rig the election by bribing people to stuff the ballot boxes with ballots marked in his candidate's favor.
rigid ADJ. stiff and unyielding; strict; hard and unbending. By living with a man to whom she was not married, George Eliot broke Victorian society's most rigid rule of respectable behavior.
rigor N. severity. Many settlers could not stand the rigors of the New England winters.
rile v. vex; irritate; muddy. Red had a hair trigger temper: he was an easy man to rile.
riveting ADJ. absorbing; engrossing. The reviewer described Byatt's novel Possession as a riveting tale: absorbed in the story, she had finished it in a single evening.
rivulet N. small stream. As the rains continued, the trickle of water running down the hillside grew into a rivulet that threatened to wash away a portion of the slope.
robust ADJ. vigorous; strong. After pumping iron and taking karate for six months, the little old lady was far more robust in health and could break a plank with her fist.
rococo ADJ. ornate; highly decorated. The rococo style in furniture and architecture, marked by scrollwork and excessive decoration, flourished during the middle of the eighteenth century.
roil v. to make liquids murky by stirring up sediment; to disturb. Be careful when you pour not to roil the wine; if you stir up the sediment you'll destroy the flavor.
roseate ADJ. rosy; optimistic. I am afraid you will have to alter your roseate views in the light of the distressing news that has just arrived.
roster N. list. They print the raster of players in the season's program.
rostrum N. platform for speech-making; pulpit. The crowd murmured angrily and indicated that they did not care to listen to the speaker who was approaching the rostrum.
rote N. repetition. He recited the passage by rote and gave no indication he understood what he was saying, also ADJ.
rotunda N. circular building or hall covered with a dome. His body lay in state in the rotunda of the Capitol.
rotundity N. roundness; sonorousness of speech. Washington Irving emphasized the rotundity of the governor by describing his height and circumference.
rousing ADJ. lively; stirring. "And now, let's have a rousing welcome for TV's own Rosie O'Donnell, who'll lead us in a rousing rendition of The Star-Spangled Banner.'"
rout v. stampede; drive out. The reinforcements were able to rout the enemy, also N.
rubble N. fragments. Ten years after World War II, some of the rubble left by enemy bombings could still be seen.
rubric N. title or heading (in red print); directions for religious ceremony; protocol. In ordaining the new priests, the bishop carefully observed all the rubrics for the ordination service.
ruddy ADJ. reddish; healthy-looking. Santa Claus's ruddy cheeks nicely complement Rudolph the Reindeer's bright red nose.
rudimentary ADJ. not developed; elementary; crude. Although my grandmother's English vocabulary was limited to a few rudimentary phrases, she always could make herself understood.
rue v. regret; lament; mourn. Tina rued the night she met Tony and wondered how she ever fell for such a jerk, also N. rueful, ADJ.
ruffian N. bully; scoundrel. The ruffians threw stones at the police.
ruminate v. chew over and over (mentally or, like cows, physically); mull over; ponder. Unable to digest quickly the baffling events of the day, Reuben ruminated about them till four in the morning.
rummage v. ransack; thoroughly search. When we rummaged through the trunks in the attic, we found many souvenirs of our childhood days, also N.
runic ADJ. mysterious; set down in an ancient alphabet. Tolkien's use of Old English words and inscriptions in the runic alphabet give The Lord of the Rings its atmosphere of antiquity.
ruse N. trick; stratagem. You will not be able to fool your friends with such an obvious ruse.
rustic ADJ. pertaining to country people; uncouth. The backwoodsman looked out of place in his rustic attire.
rusticate v. banish to the country; dwell in the country. I like city life so much that I can never understand how people can rusticate in the suburbs.
ruthless ADJ. pitiless; cruel. Captain Hook was a dangerous, ruthless villain who would stop at nothing to destroy Peter Pan.
