saboteur N. one who commits sabotage; destroyer of property. Members of the Resistance acted as sabo¬teurs, blowing up train lines to prevent supplies from reaching the Nazi army.
saccharine ADJ. cloyingly sweet. She tried to ingratiate herself, speaking sweetly and smiling a saccharine smile.
sacrilegious ADJ. desecrating; profane. His stealing of the altar cloth was a very sacrilegious act.
sacrosanct ADJ. most sacred; inviolable. The brash insurance salesman invaded the sacrosanct privacy of the office of the president of the company.
sadistic ADJ. inclined to cruelty. If we are to improve conditions in this prison, we must first get rid of the sadistic warden, sadism, N.
saga N. Scandinavian myth; any legend. This is a saga of the sea and the men who risk their lives on it.
sagacious ADJ. perceptive; shrewd; having insight. My father was a sagacious judge of character: he could spot a phony a mile away, sagacity, N.
sage   N. person celebrated for wisdom. Hearing tales of a mysterious Master of All Knowledge who lived in the hills of Tibet, Sandy was possessed with a burning desire to consult the legendary sage, also ADJ.
salacious ADJ. lascivious; lustful. Chaucer's monk is not pious but salacious, a teller of lewd tales and ribald jests.
salient ADJ. prominent. One of the salient features of that newspaper is its excellent editorial page.
saline ADJ. salty. The slightly saline taste of this mineral water is pleasant.
sallow ADJ. yellowish; sickly in color. We were disturbed by her sallow complexion, which was due to jaundice.
salubrious   ADJ. healthful. Many people with hay fever move to more salubrious sections of the country during the months of August and September.
salutary ADJ. tending to improve; beneficial; wholesome. The punishment had a salutary effect on the boy, as he became a model student.
salvage v. rescue from loss. All attempts to salvage the wrecked ship failed, also N.
sanctimonious ADJ. displaying ostentatious or hypocriti¬cal devoutness. You do not have to be so sanctimonious to prove that you are devout.
sanction v. approve; ratify. Nothing will convince me to sanction the engagement of my daughter to such a worthless young man.
sanctuary N. refuge; shelter; shrine; holy place. The tiny attic was Helen's sanctuary to which she fled when she had to get away from her bickering parents and brothers.
sanguinary ADJ. bloody. The battle of Iwo Jima was unex¬pectedly sanguinary, with many casualties.
sanguine ADJ. cheerful; hopeful. Let us not be too san¬guine about the outcome; something could go wrong.
sap v. diminish; undermine. The element kryptonite had an unhealthy effect on Superman: it sapped his strength.
sarcasm N. scornful remark; stinging rebuke. Though Ralph pretended to ignore the mocking comments of his supposed friends, their sarcasm wounded him deeply, sarcastic, ADJ.
sardonic ADJ. disdainful; sarcastic; cynical. The sardonic humor of nightclub comedians who satirize or ridicule patrons in the audience strikes some people as amusing and others as rude.
sartorial ADJ. pertaining to tailors. He was as famous for the sartorial splendor of his attire as he was for his acting.
sate v. satisfy to the full; cloy. Its hunger sated, the lion dozed.
secession N. withdrawal. The secession of the Southern states provided Lincoln with his first major problem after his inauguration, secede, v.
seclusion N. isolation; solitude. One moment she loved crowds; the next, she sought seclusion.
secrete v. hide away or cache; produce and release a substance into an organism. The pack rat secretes odds and ends in its nest; the pancreas secretes insulin in the islets of Langerhans.
sect N. separate religious body; faction. As university chaplain, she sought to address universal religious issues and not limit herself to the concerns of any one sect, sectarian, ADJ.
secular ADJ. worldly; not pertaining to church matters; temporal. The church leaders decided not to interfere in secular matters.
sedate ADJ. composed; grave. The parents were worried because they felt their son was too quiet and sedate.
sedentary ADJ. requiring sitting. Sitting all day at the computer, Sharon grew to resent the sedentary nature of her job.
sedition N. resistance to authority; insubordination. Her words, though not treasonous in themselves, were calculated to arouse thoughts of sedition.
sedulous ADJ. diligent. The young woman was so sedulous that she received a commendation for her hard work, sedulity, N.
seedy ADJ. run-down; decrepit; disreputable. I would rather stay in dormitory lodgings in a decent youth hostel than have a room of my own in a seedy downtown hotel.
seemly ADJ. proper; appropriate. Lady Bracknell did not think it was seemly for Ernest to lack a proper family: no baby abandoned on a doorstep could grow up to marry her daughter.
seep v. ooze; trickle. During the rainstorm, water seeped through the crack in the basement wall and damaged the floor boards, seepage, N.
seethe v. be disturbed; boil. The nation was seething with discontent as the noblemen continued their arrogant ways.
seine N. net for catching fish. When the shad run during the spring, you may see fishermen with seines along the banks of our coastal rivers.
seismic ADJ. pertaining to earthquakes. The Richter scale is a measurement of seismic disturbances.
semblance N. outward appearance; guise. Although this book has a semblance of wisdom and scholarship, a careful examination will reveal many errors and omissions.
seminal ADJ. germinal; influencing future developments; related to seed or semen. Although Freud has generally been regarded as a seminal thinker who shaped the course of psychology, his psychoanalytic methods have come under attack recently.
seminary N. school for training future ministers; secondary school, especially for young women. Sure of his priestly vocation, Terrence planned to pursue his theo¬logical training at the local Roman Catholic seminary.
senility N. old age; feeblemindedness of old age. Most of the decisions are being made by the junior members of the company because of the senility of the president, senile, ADJ.
sensitization N. process of being made sensitive or acutely responsive to an external agent or substance. The paint fumes triggered a bad allergic response in Vicky; even now, her extreme sensitization to these chemicals causes her to faint whenever she is around wet paint.
sensual ADJ. devoted to the pleasures of the senses; carnal; voluptuous. I cannot understand what caused him to drop his sensual way of life and become so ascetic.
sensuous ADJ. pertaining to the physical senses; operating through the senses. She was stimulated by the sights, sounds, and smells about her; she was enjoying her sensuous experience.
sententious ADJ. terse; concise; aphoristic. After reading so many redundant speeches, I find his sententious style particularly pleasing.
sentient ADJ. capable of sensation; aware; sensitive. In the science fiction story, the hero had to discover a way to prove that the rocklike extraterrestrial creature was actually a sentient, intelligent creature, sentience, N.
sentinel N. sentry; lookout. Though camped in enemy territory, Bledsoe ignored the elementary precaution of posting sentinels around the encampment.
septic ADJ. putrid; producing putrefaction. The hospital was in such a filthy state that we were afraid that many of the patients would suffer from septic poisoning, sepsis, N.
sepulcher N. tomb. Annabel Lee was buried in a sepulcher by the sea.
sequester v. isolate; retire from public life; segregate; seclude. To prevent the jurors from hearing news broadcasts about the case, the judge decided to sequesterthe jury.
sere ADJ. parched; dry. After the unseasonably dry winter the Berkeley hills looked dusty and sere.
serendipity N. gift for finding valuable or desirable things by accident; accidental good fortune or luck. Many scientific discoveries are a matter of serendipity: Newton was not sitting there thinking about gravity when the apple dropped on his head.
serenity N. calmness, placidity. The serenity of the sleepy town was shattered by a tremendous explosion.
serpentine ADJ. winding; twisting. The car swerved at every curve in the serpentine road.
serrated ADJ. having a sawtoothed edge. The beech tree is one of many plants that have serrated leaves.
servile ADJ. slavish; cringing. Constantly fawning on his employer, humble Uriah Heep was a servile creature, servility, N.
servitude N. slavery; compulsory labor. Born a slave, Douglass resented his life of servitude and plotted to escape to the North.
sever v. cut; separate. Dr. Guillotin invented a machine that could neatly sever an aristocratic head from its equally aristocratic body. Unfortunately, he couldn't collect any severance pay.
severity N. harshness; intensity; sternness; austerity. The severity of Jane's migraine attack was so great that she took to her bed for a week, severe, ADJ.
sextant N. navigation tool used to determine a ship's latitude and longitude. Given a clear night, with the aid of his sextant and compass he could keep the ship safely on course.
shackle v. chain; fetter. The criminal's ankles were shackled to prevent his escape, also N.
sham v. pretend. She shammed sickness to get out of going to school, also N.
shambles N. wreck; mess. After the hurricane, the Carolina coast was a shambles. After the New Year's Eve party, the host's apartment was a shambles.
shard N. fragment, generally of pottery. The archaeologist assigned several students the task of reassembling earthenware vessels from the shards he had brought back from the expedition.
shaving N. very thin piece, usually of wood. As the carpenter pared away the edge of the board with his plane, a small pile of shavings began to accumulate on the floor.
sheaf N. bundle of stalks of grain; any bundle of things tied together. The lawyer picked up a sheaf'of papers as she rose to question the witness.
sheathe v. place into a case. As soon as he recognized the approaching men, he sheathed his dagger and hailed them as friends.
sherbet N. flavored dessert ice. I prefer raspberry sherbet to ice cream since it is less fattening.
shimmer v. glimmer intermittently. The moonlight shimmered on the water as the moon broke through the clouds for a moment, also N.
shirk v. avoid (responsibility, work, etc.); malinger. Brian has a strong sense of duty; he would never shirk any responsibility.
shoddy ADJ. sham; not genuine; inferior. You will never get the public to buy such shoddy material.
shrew N. scolding woman. No one wanted to marry Shakespeare's Kate because she was a shrew.
shrewd ADJ. clever; astute. A shrewd investor, she took clever advantage of the fluctuations of the stock market.
shun v. keep away from. Cherishing his solitude, the recluse shunned the company of other human beings.
shunt v. turn aside; divert; sidetrack. If the switchman failed to shunt the Silver Streak onto a side track, the train would plow right into Union Station.
shyster N. lawyer using questionable methods. On L.A. Law, respectable attorney Brackman was horrified to learn that his newly discovered half brother was a cheap shyster.
sibling N. brother or sister. We may not enjoy being sibings, but we cannot forget that we still belong to the same family.
sibylline ADJ. prophetic; oracular. Until their destruction by fire in 83 B.C., the sibylline books were often consulted by the Romans.
sidereal ADJ. relating to the stars. Although hampered by optical and mechanical flaws, the orbiting Hubble space telescope has relayed extraordinary images of distant sidereal bodies.
silt N. sediment deposited by running water. The harbor channel must be dredged annually to remove the silt.
simian ADJ. monkeylike. Lemurs are nocturnal mammals and have many simian characteristics, although they are less intelligent than monkeys.
simile   N. comparison of one thing with another, using the word like or as. "My love is like a red, red rose" is a simile.
simper   v. smirk; smile affectedly. Complimented on her appearance, Stella self-consciously simpered.
simplistic ADJ. oversimplified. Though Jack's solution dealt adequately with one aspect of the problem, it was simplistic in failing to consider various complicating factors that might arise.
simulate v. feign. She simulated insanity in order to avoid punishment for her crime.
sinecure N. well-paid position with little responsibility. My job is no sinecure; I work long hours and have much responsibility.
sinewy ADJ. tough; strong and firm. The steak was too sinewy to chew.
singular ADJ. unique; extraordinary; odd. Though the young man tried to understand Father William's singular behavior, he still found it odd that the old man incessantly stood on his head.
sinister ADJ. evil. We must defeat the sinister forces that seek our downfall.
sinuous ADJ. winding; bending in and out; not morally honest. The snake moved in a sinuous manner.
skeptic N. doubter; person who suspends judgment until having examined the evidence supporting a point of view. I am a skeptic about the new health plan; I want some proof that it can work, skeptical, ADJ. skepticism, N.
skiff N. small, light sailboat or rowboat. Tom dreamed of owning an ocean-going yacht but had to settle for a skiff he could sail in the bay.
skimp v. provide scantily; live very economically. They were forced to skimp on necessities in order to make their limited supplies last the winter.
skinflint N. stingy person; miser. Scrooge was an ungen¬erous old skinflint until he reformed his ways and became a notable philanthropist.
skirmish N. minor fight. Custer's troops expected they might run into a skirmish or two on maneuvers; they did not expect to face a major battle, also v.
skittish ADJ. lively; frisky. She is as skittish as a kitten playing with a piece of string.
skulduggery N. dishonest behavior. The investigation into municipal corruption turned up new instances of skulduggery daily.
skulk v. move furtively and secretly. He skulked through the less fashionable sections of the city in order to avoid meeting any of his former friends.
slacken v. slow up; loosen. As they passed the finish line, the runners slackened their pace.
slag N. residue from smelting metal; dross; waste matter. The blast furnace had a special opening at the bottom to allow the workers to remove the worthless slag.
slake v. quench; sate. When we reached the oasis, we were able to slake our thirst.
slander N. defamation; utterance of false and malicious statements. Considering the negative comments politicians make about each other, it's a wonder that more of them aren't sued for slander, also v. slanderous, ADJ.
slapdash ADJ. haphazard; careless; sloppy. From the number of typos and misspellings I've found in it, it's clear that Mario proofread the report in a remarkably slapdash fashion.
sleazy ADJ. flimsy; unsubstantial. This is a sleazy fabric; it will not wear well.
sleeper N. something originally of little value or importance that in time becomes very valuable. Unnoticed by the critics at its publication, the eventual Pulitzer Prize winner was a classic sleeper.
sleight N. dexterity. The magician amazed the audience with his sleight of hand.
slew N. large quantity or number. Although Ellen had checked off a number of items on her "To Do" list, she still had a whole s/ewof errands left.
slight N. insult to one's dignity; snub. Hypersensitive and ready to take offense at any discourtesy, Bertha was always on the lookout for real or imaginary slights, also v.
slipshod ADJ. untidy or slovenly; shabby. As a master craftsman, the carpenter prided himself on never doing slipshod work.
slither v. slip or slide. During the recent ice storm, many people slithered down this hill as they walked to the station.
sloth N. slow-moving tree-dwelling mammal. Note how well the somewhat greenish coat of the sloth enables it to blend in with its arboreal surroundings, (secondary meaning)
slothful ADJ. lazy. The British word "layabout" is a splendid descriptive term for someone slothful: What did the lazy bum do? He lay about the house all day. sloth, N.
slough v. cast off. Each spring, the snake sloughs off its skin, also N.
slovenly ADJ. untidy; careless in work habits. Unshaven, sitting around in his bathrobe all afternoon, Gus didn't care about the slovenly appearance he presented, sloven, N.
sluggard N. lazy person. "You are a sluggard, a drone, a parasite," the angry father shouted at his lazy son.
sluggish ADJ. slow; lazy; lethargic. After two nights without sleep, she felt sluggish and incapable of exertion.
sluice N. artificial channel for directing or controlling the flow of water. In times of drought, this sluice enables farmers to obtain water for irrigation.
slur N. insult to one's character or reputation; slander. Polls revealed that the front-runner's standing had been damaged by the slurs and innuendoes circulated by his opponent's staff, (secondary meaning) also v.
slur v. speak indistinctly; mumble. When Sol has too much to drink, he starts to slur his words: "Washamatter? Cansh you undershtand what I shay?"
smattering N. slight knowledge. I don't know whether it is better to be ignorant of a subject or to have a mere smattering of information about it.
smelt v. melt or blend ores, changing their chemical composition. The furnaceman smelts tin with copper to create a special alloy used in making bells.
smirk N. conceited smile. Wipe that smirk off your face! also v.
smolder v. burn without flame; be liable to break out at any moment. The rags smoldered for hours before they burst into flame.
snicker N. half-stifled laugh. The boy could not suppress a snicker when the teacher sat on the tack, also v.
snivel v. run at the nose; snuffle; whine. Don't you come sniveling to me complaining about your big brother.
sobriety N. moderation (especially regarding indulgence in alcohol); seriousness. Neither falling-down drunks nor stand-up comics are noted for sobriety, sober, ADJ.
sodden   ADJ. soaked; dull, as if from drink. He set his sodden overcoat near the radiator to dry. sojourn    N. temporary stay. After his sojourn in Florida, he began to long for the colder climate of his native New England home.
solace N. comfort in trouble. I hope you will find solace in the thought that all of us share your loss.
solder v. repair or make whole by using a metal alloy. The plumber fixed the leak in the pipes by soldering a couple of joints from which water had been oozing.
solecism N. construction that is flagrantly incorrect grammatically. I must give this paper a failing mark because it contains many solecisms.
solemnity N. seriousness; gravity. The minister was concerned that nothing should disturb the solemnity of the marriage service.
solicit v. request earnestly; seek. Knowing she needed to have a solid majority for the budget to pass, the mayor telephoned all the members of the city council to solicit their votes.
solicitous ADJ. worried, concerned. The employer was very solicitous about the health of her employees as replacements were difficult to get. solicitude, N.
soliloquy N. talking to oneself. The soliloquy is a device used by the dramatist to reveal a character's innermost thoughts and emotions.
solitude N. state of being alone; seclusion. Much depends on how much you like your own company. What to one person seems fearful isolation to another is blessed solitude, solitary, ADJ.
solstice N. point at which the sun is farthest from the equator. The winter solstice usually occurs on December 21.
soluble ADJ. able to be dissolved; able to be worked out. Sugar is soluble in water; put a sugar cube in water and it will quickly dissolve. Because the test-maker had left out some necessary data, the problem was not soluble.
solvent ADJ. able to pay all debts. By dint of very frugal living, he was finally able to become solvent and avoid bankruptcy proceedings, solvency, N.
solvent N. substance that dissolves another. Dip a cube of sugar into a cup of water; note how the water acts as a solvent, causing the cube to break down.
somatic ADJ. pertaining to the body; physical. Why do you ignore the spiritual aspects and emphasize only the corporeal and the somatic ones?
somber ADJ. gloomy; depressing. From the doctor's grim expression, I could tell he had somber news.
somnambulist N. sleepwalker. The most famous somnambulist in literature is Lady Macbeth; her monologue in the sleepwalking scene is one of the highlights of Shakespeare's play.
somnolent ADJ. half asleep. The heavy meal and the overheated room made us all somnolent and indifferent to the speaker, somnolence, N.
sonorous ADJ. resonant. His sonorous voice resounded through the hall.
sophist N. teacher of philosophy; quibbler; employer of fallacious reasoning. You are using all the devices of a sophist in trying to prove your case; your argument is specious.
sophisticated ADJ. worldly wise and urbane; complex. When Sophy makes wisecracks, she thinks she sounds sophisticated, but instead she sounds sophomoric. The IBM laptop with the butterfly keyboard and the built-in FAX modem is a pretty sophisticated machine, sophisti¬cation, N.
sophistry N. seemingly plausible but fallacious reasoning. Instead of advancing valid arguments, he tried to overwhelm his audience with a flood of sophistries.
sophomoric ADJ. immature; half-baked, like a sophomore. Even if you're only a freshman, it's no compliment to be told your humor is sophomoric. The humor in Dumb and Dumber is sophomoric at best.
soporific ADJ. sleep-causing; marked by sleepiness. Professor Pringle's lectures were so soporific that even he fell asleep in class, also N.
sordid ADJ. filthy; base; vile. The social worker was angered by the sordid housing provided for the homeless.
spangle N. small metallic piece sewn to clothing for orna¬mentation. The thousands of spangles on her dress sparkled in the glare of the stage lights.
sparse ADJ. not thick; thinly scattered; scanty. No matter how carefully Albert combed his hair to make it appear as full as possible, it still looked sparse.
spartan ADJ. lacking luxury and comfort; sternly disciplined. Looking over the bare, unheated room with its hard cot, he wondered what he was doing in such spar¬tan quarters. Only his spartan sense of duty kept him at his post.
spasmodic ADJ. fitful; periodic. The spasmodic cough ing in the auditorium annoyed the performers.
spat N. squabble; minor dispute. What had started out as a mere spat escalated into a full-blown argument.
spate N. sudden flood. I am worried about the possibility of a spate if the rains do not diminish soon.
spatial ADJ. relating to space. Certain exercises test your sense of spatial relations by asking you to identify two views of an object seen from different points in space.
spatula N. broad-bladed instrument used for spreading or mixing. The manufacturers of this frying pan recom¬mend the use of a rubber spatula to avoid scratching the specially treated surface.
spawn v. lay eggs. Fish ladders had to be built in the dams to assist the salmon returning to spawn in their native streams, also N.
specious   ADJ.  seemingly reasonable but incorrect; misleading (often intentionally). To claim that, because houses and  birds both have wings,  both can fly is extremely specious reasoning.
spectral ADJ. ghostly. We were frightened by the spectral glow that filled the room.
spectrum   N. colored band produced when a beam of light passes through a prism. The visible portion of the spectrum includes red at one end and violet at the other.
spendthrift N. someone who wastes money. Easy access to credit encourages people to turn into spendthrifts who shop till they drop.
sphinx-like ADJ. enigmatic; mysterious. The Mona Lisa's sphinx-like expression has puzzled art lovers for centuries.
splice v. fasten together; unite. Before you splice two strips of tape together, be sure to line them up evenly, also N.
spontaneity N. lack of premeditation; naturalness; freedom from constraint. The cast overrehearsed the play so much that the eventual performance lacked any spon¬taneity, spontaneous, ADJ.
spoonerism N. accidental transposition of sounds in successive words. When the radio announcer introduced the President as Hoobert Herver, he was guilty of a spoonerism.
sporadic ADJ. occurring irregularly. Although you can still hear sporadic outbursts of laughter and singing out¬side, the big Halloween parade has passed; the party's over till next year.
sportive ADJ. playful. Such a sportive attitude is surpris¬ing in a person as serious as you usually are.
spruce ADJ. neat and trim. Every button buttoned, tie firmly in place, young Alex Keaton looked spruce and tidy for his job interview at the bank, also v.
spry ADJ. vigorously active; nimble. She was eighty years old, yet still spry and alert.
spurious ADJ. false; counterfeit; forged; illogical. The hero of Jonathan Gash's mystery novels is an antique dealer who gives the reader advice on how to tell spurious antiques from the real thing.
spurn v. reject; scorn. The heroine spumed the villain's advances.
squabble N. minor quarrel; bickering. Children invariably get involved in petty squabbles; wise parents know when to interfere and when to let the children work things out on their own.
squalor N. filth; degradation; dirty, neglected state. Rusted, broken-down cars in the yard, trash piled on the porch, tar paper peeling from the roof—the shack was the picture of squalor, squalid, ADJ.
squander v. waste. If you squander your allowance on candy and comic books, you won't have any money left to buy the new box of crayons you want.
squat ADJ. stocky; short and thick. Tolkien's hobbits are somewhat squat, sturdy little creatures, fond of good ale, good music, and good food.
staccato ADJ. played in an abrupt manner; marked by abrupt, sharp sound. His staccato speech reminded one of the sound of a machine gun.
stagnant ADJ. motionless; stale; dull. Mosquitoes commonly breed in ponds of stagnant water. Mike's career was stagnant; it wasn't going anywhere, and neither was he! stagnate, v.
staid ADJ. sober; sedate. Her conduct during the funeral ceremony was staid and solemn.
stalemate N. deadlock. Negotiations between the union and the employers have reached a stalemate; neither side is willing to budge from previously stated positions, stalwart ADJ. strong, brawny; steadfast. His consistent support of the party has proved that he is a stalwart and loyal member, also N.
stamina N. strength; staying power. I doubt that she has the stamina to run the full distance of the marathon race.
stanch v. check flow of blood. It is imperative that we stanch the gushing wound before we attend to the other injuries.
stanza N. division of a poem. Do you know the last stanza of "The Star-Spangled Banner"?
static ADJ. unchanging; lacking development. Why do you watch chess on TV? I like watching a game with action, not something static where nothing seems to be going on. stasis, N.
statute N. law enacted by the legislature. The statute of limitations sets limits on how long you have to take legal action in specific cases.
statutory ADJ. created by statute or legislative action. The judicial courts review and try statutory crimes.
steadfast ADJ. loyal; unswerving. Penelope was steadfast in her affections, faithfully waiting for Ulysses to return from his wanderings.
stealth N. slyness; sneakiness; secretiveness. Fearing detection by the sentries on duty, the scout inched his way toward the enemy camp with great stealth.
steep v. soak; saturate. Be sure to sfeep the fabric in the dye bath for the full time prescribed.
stellar ADJ. pertaining to the stars. He was the stellar attraction of the entire performance.
stem v. check the flow. The paramedic used a tourni¬quet to stem the bleeding from the slashed artery.
stem from v. arise from, Milton's problems in school stemmed from his poor study habits.
stentorian ADJ. extremely loud. The town crier had a stentorian voice.
stereotype N. fixed and unvarying representation; standardized mental picture, often reflecting prejudice. Critics object to the character of Jim in The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn because he seems to reflect the stereo¬type of the happy, ignorant slave, also v.
stickler N. perfectionist; person who insists things be exactly right. The Internal Revenue Service agent was a stickler for accuracy; no approximations or rough estimates would satisfy him.
stifle v. suppress; extinguish; inhibit. Halfway through the boring lecture, Laura gave up trying to stifle her yawns.
stigma   N. token of disgrace; brand. I do not attach any stigma to the fact that you were accused of this crime; the fact that you were acquitted clears you completely, stigmatize, N.
stilted ADJ. bombastic; stiffly pompous. His stilted rhetoric did not impress the college audience; they were immune to bombastic utterances.
stint   v. be thrifty; set limits. "Spare no expense," the bride's father said,  refusing to stint on the wedding arrangements.
stint N. supply; allotted amount; assigned portion of work. She performed her daily stint cheerfully and willingly.
stipend N. pay for services. There is a nominal stipend for this position.
stipple v. paint or draw with dots. Seurat carefully stippled dabs of pure color on the canvas, juxtaposing dots of blue and yellow that the viewer's eye would interpret as green.
stipulate   v. make express conditions, specify. Before agreeing to reduce American military forces in Europe, the president stipulated that NATO teams be allowed to inspect Russian bases.
stock ADJ. typical; standard; kept regularly in supply. Victorian melodramas portrayed stock characters—the rich but wicked villain, the sweet young ingenue, the poor but honest young man—in exaggerated situations. Although the stationery store kept only stock sizes of paper on hand, the staff would special-order any items not regularly in stock.
stockade N. wooden enclosure or pen; fixed line of posts used as defensive barrier. The Indians are coming! Quick! Round up the horses and drive them into the stockade.
stodgy ADJ. stuffy; boringly conservative. For a young person, Winston seems remarkably stodgy: you'd expect someone his age to have a little more life.
stoic ADJ. impassive; unmoved by joy or grief. I wasn't particularly stoic when I had my flu shot; I squealed like a stuck pig. also N. stoicism, N.
stoke v. stir up a fire; feed plentifully. As a Scout, Marisa learned how to light a fire, how to stoke it if it started to die down, and how to extinguish it completely.
stolid   ADJ. dull; impassive. The earthquake shattered Stuart's usual stolid demeanor; trembling, he crouched on the no longer stable ground, stolidity, N.
stratagem N. clever trick; deceptive scheme. What a gem of a stratageml Watson, I have the perfect plan to trick Moriarty into revealing himself.
stratified ADJ. divided into classes; arranged into strata. As the economic gap between the rich and the poor increased, Roman society grew increasingly stratified. stratify, v.
stratum N. layer of earth's surface; layer of society. Unless we alleviate conditions in the lowest stratum of our society, we may expect grumbling and revolt, strata, PL.
strew v. spread randomly; sprinkle; scatter. Preceding the bride to the altar, the flower girl will strew rose petals along the aisle.
striated   ADJ. marked with parallel bands; grooved. The glacier left many striated rocks, striate, v.
stricture N. critical comments; severe and adverse criticism. His strictures on the author's style are prejudiced and unwarranted.
strident ADJ. loud and harsh; insistent. We could barely hear the speaker over the strident cries of the hecklers, stridency, N.
stringent ADJ. binding; rigid. I think these regulations are too stringent.
strut   N. pompous walk. His strut as he marched about the parade ground revealed him for what he was: a pompous buffoon, also v.
strut   N. supporting bar. The engineer calculated that the strut supporting the rafter needed to be reinforced.
studied ADJ. unspontaneous; deliberate; thoughtful. Given Jill's previous slights, Jack felt that the omission of his name from the guest list was a studied insult.
stultify v. cause to appear or become stupid or inconsistent; frustrate or hinder. His long hours in the blacking factory left young Dickens numb and incurious, as if the menial labor had stultified his mind.
stupefy v. make numb; stun; amaze. Disapproving of drugs in general, Laura refused to take sleeping pills or any other medicine that might stupefy her.
stupor N. state of apathy; daze; lack of awareness. In his stupor, the addict was unaware of the events taking place around him.
Stygian ADJ. gloomy; hellish; deathly. Shielding the flickering candle from any threatening draft, Tom and Becky descended into the Stygian darkness of the underground cavern. Stygian derives from Styx, the chief river in the subterranean land of the dead.
stymie v. present an obstacle; stump. The detective was stymied by the contradictory evidence in the robbery investigation.
suavity N. urbanity; polish. He is particularly good in roles that require suavity and sophistication, suave, ADJ.
subaltern N. subordinate. The captain treated his subalterns as though they were children rather than commissioned officers.
subdued ADJ. less intense; quieter. Bob liked the subdued lighting at the restaurant because he thought it was romantic. I just thought the place was dimly lit.
subjective ADJ. occurring or taking place within the mind; unreal. Your analysis is highly subjective; you have permitted your emotions and your opinions to color your thinking.
subjugate v. conquer; bring under control. It is not our aim to subjugate our foe; we are interested only in estab¬lishing peaceful relations.
sublimate v. refine; purify. We must strive to sublimate these desires and emotions into worthwhile activities.
sublime ADJ. exalted; noble and uplifting; utter. Lucy was in awe of Desi's sublime musicianship, while he was in awe of her sublime naivete.
subliminal ADJ. below the threshold. We may not be aware of the subliminal influences that affect our thinking.
submissive ADJ. yielding; timid. When he refused to permit Elizabeth to marry her poet, Mr. Barrett expected her to be properly submissive; instead, she eloped with the guy!
subordinate ADJ. occupying a lower rank; inferior; submissive. Bishop Proudie's wife expected the subordinate clergy to behave with great deference to the wife of their superior, also N.
suborn v. persuade to act unlawfully (especially to commit perjury). In The Godfather, the mobsters used bribery and threats to suborn the witnesses against Don Michael Corleone.
subpoena   N. writ summoning a witness to appear. The prosecutor's office was ready to serve a subpoena on the reluctant witness, also v.
subsequent ADJ. following; later. In subsequent lessons, we shall take up more difficult problems.
subservient ADJ. behaving like a slave; servile; obsequious. She was proud and dignified; she refused to be subservient to anyone, subservience, N.
subside   v. settle down; descend; grow quiet. The doctor assured  us that the fever would  eventually subside.
subsidiary ADJ. subordinate; secondary. This information may be used as subsidiary evidence but is not sufficient by itself to prove your argument, also N.
subsidy N. direct financial aid by government, etc. Without this subsidy, American ship operators would not be able to compete in world markets.
subsistence N. existence; means of support; livelihood. In those days of inflated prices, my salary provided a mere subsistence.
substantial ADJ. ample; solid; essential or fundamental. The generous scholarship represented a substantial sum of money. If you don't eat a more substantial dinner, you'll be hungry later on.
substantiate v. establish by evidence; verify; support. These endorsements from satisfied customers substanti¬ate our claim that Barren's How to Prepare for the GRE is the best GRE-prep book on the market.
substantive ADJ. essential; pertaining to the substance. Although the delegates were aware of the importance of the problem, they could not agree on the substantive issues.
subsume v. include; encompass. Does the general theory of relativity contradict Newtonian physics, or is Newton's law of gravity subsumed into Einstein's larger scheme?
subterfuge N. pretense; evasion. As soon as we realized that you had won our support by a subterfuge, we withdrew our endorsement of your candidacy.
subtlety N. perceptiveness; ingenuity; delicacy. Never obvious, she expressed herself with such subtlety that her remarks went right over the heads of most of her audience, subtle, ADJ.
subversive ADJ. tending to overthrow; destructive. At first glance, the notion that Styrofoam cups may actually be more ecologically sound than paper cups strikes most environmentalists as subversive.
succinct ADJ. brief; terse; compact. Don't bore your audience with excess verbiage; be succinct.
succor v. aid; assist; comfort. If you believe that con man has come here to succor you in your hour of need, you're even a bigger sucker than I thought, also N.
succulent ADJ. juicy; full of richness. To some people, Florida citrus fruits are more succulent than those from California, also N.
succumb v. yield; give in; die. I succumb to temptation whenever it comes my way.
suffragist N. advocate of voting rights (for women). In recognition of her efforts to win the vote for women, Congress authorized coining a silver dollar honoring the suffragist Susan B. Anthony.
suffuse v. spread over. A blush suffused her cheeks when we teased her about her love affair.
sully v. tarnish; soil. He felt that it was beneath his dignity to sully his hands in such menial labor.
sultry ADJ. sweltering. He could not adjust himself to the sultry climate of the tropics.
summation N. act of finding the total; summary. In his summation, the lawyer emphasized the testimony given by the two witnesses.
sumptuous ADJ. lavish; rich. I cannot recall when I have had such a sumptuous Thanksgiving feast.
sunder v. separate; part. Northern and southern Ireland are politically and religiously sundered.
sundry ADJ. various; several. My suspicions were aroused when I read sundry items in the newspapers about your behavior.
superannuated ADJ. retired or disqualified because of age. Don't call me superannuated; I can still perform a good day's work!
supercilious ADJ. arrogant; condescending; patronizing. The supercilious headwaiter sneered at customers who he thought did not fit the image of a restaurant catering to an ultrafashionable crowd.
supererogatory ADJ. superfluous; more than needed or demanded. We have more than enough witnesses to corroborate your statement; to present any more would be supererogatory.
superficial ADJ. trivial; shallow. Since your report gave only a superficial analysis of the problem, I cannot give you more than a passing grade.
superfluous ADJ. excessive; overabundant, unnecessary. Please try not to include so many superfluous details in your report; just give me the bare facts, superfluity, N.
superimpose v. place over something else. Your attempt to superimpose another agency in this field will merely increase the bureaucratic nature of our government.
supernumerary N. person or thing in excess of what is necessary; extra. His first appearance on the stage was as a supernumerary in a Shakespearean tragedy.
supersede v. cause to be set aside; replace; make obsolete. Bulk mailing postal regulation 326D supersedes bulk mailing postal regulation 326C. If, in bundling your bulk mailing, you follow regulation 326C, your bulk mailing will be returned, supersession, N.
supine ADJ. lying on back. The defeated pugilist lay supine on the canvas.
supplant v. replace; usurp. Did the other woman actually supplant Princess Diana in Prince Charles's affections, or did Charles never love Diana at all? Bolingbroke, later to be known as King Henry IV, fought to supplant his cousin, Richard III, as King of England.
supple ADJ. flexible; pliant. Years of yoga exercises made Grace's body supple.
suppliant ADJ. entreating; beseeching. Unable to resist the dog's suppliant whimpering, he gave it some food, also N.
supplicate v. petition humbly; pray to grant a favor. We supplicate Your Majesty to grant him amnesty.
supposition N. hypothesis; surmise. I based my decision to confide in him on the supposition that he would be discreet, suppose, v.
supposititious ADJ. assumed; counterfeit; hypothetical. I find no similarity between your supposititious illustration and the problem we are facing.
suppress v. stifle; overwhelm; subdue; inhibit. Too polite to laugh in anyone's face, Roy did his best to suppress his amusement at Ed's inane remark.
surfeit v. satiate; stuff; indulge to excess in anything. Every Thanksgiving we are surfeited with an over abundance of holiday treats, also N.
surly ADJ. rude; cross. Because of his surly attitude, many people avoided his company.
surmise v. guess. I surmise that he will be late for this meeting, also N.
surmount v. overcome. I know you can surmount any difficulties that may stand in the way of your getting an education.
surpass v. exceed. Her SAT scores surpassed our expectations.
surreptitious ADJ. secret; furtive; sneaky; hidden. Hoping to discover where his mom had hidden the Christmas presents, Timmy took a surreptitious peek into the master bedroom closet.
surrogate N. substitute. For a fatherless child, a male teacher may become a father surrogate.
surveillance N. watching; guarding. The FBI kept the house under constant surveillance in the hope of capturing all the criminals at one time.
susceptible ADJ. impressionable; easily influenced; having little resistance, as to a disease; receptive to. Said the patent medicine man to his very susceptible customer: "Buy this new miracle drug, and you will no longer be susceptible to the common cold." susceptibility, N. sustain v. experience; support; nourish. He sustained such a severe injury that the doctors feared he would be unable to work to sustain his growing family.
sustenance N. means of support, food, nourishment. In the tropics, the natives find sustenance easy to obtain because of all the fruit trees.
suture N. stitches sewn to hold the cut edges of a wound or incision; material used in sewing. We will remove the sutures as soon as the wound heals, also v.
swarthy ADJ. dark; dusky. Despite the stereotype, not all Italians are swarthy; many are fair and blond.
swathe v. wrap around; bandage. When I visited him in the hospital, I found him swathed in bandages.
swelter v. be oppressed by heat. I am going to buy an air conditioning unit for my apartment as I do not intend to swelter through another hot and humid summer.
swerve v. deviate; turn aside sharply. The car swerved wildly as the driver struggled to regain control of the wheel.
swill v. drink greedily. Singing "Yo, ho, ho, and a bottle of rum," Long John Silver and his fellow pirates swilled their grog.
swindler N. cheat. She was gullible and trusting, an easy victim for the first swindler who came along.
sybarite N. lover of luxury. Rich people are not always sybarites; some of them have little taste for a life of luxury.
sycophant N. servile flatterer; bootlicker; yes man. Fed up with the toadies and brownnosers who made up his entourage, the star cried, "Get out, all of you! I'm sick of sycophants]" sycophantic, ADJ.
syllogism N. logical formula consisting of a major premise, a minor premise and a conclusion; deceptive or specious argument. There must be a fallacy in this syllogism; I cannot accept its conclusion.
sylvan ADJ. pertaining to the woods; rustic. His paintings of nymphs in sylvan backgrounds were criticized as oversentimental.
symbiosis N. interdependent relationship (between groups, species), often mutually beneficial. Both the crocodile bird and the crocodile derive benefit from their symbiosis; pecking away at food particles embedded in the crocodile's teeth, the bird derives nourishment; the crocodile, meanwhile, derives proper dental hygiene, symbiotic, ADJ.
symmetry N. arrangement of parts so that balance is obtained; congruity. By definition, something lopsided lacks symmetry, symmetrical, ADJ.
synchronous ADJ. similarly timed; simultaneous with. We have many examples of scientists in different parts of the world who have made synchronous discoveries.
synoptic ADJ. providing a general overview; summary. The professor turned to the latest issue of Dissertation Abstracts for a synoptic account of what was new in the field, synopsis, N.
synthesis N. combining parts into a whole. Now that we have succeeded in isolating this drug, our next problem is to plan its synthesis in the laboratory, syntheses, PL., synthesize, v.
synthetic ADJ. artificial; resulting from synthesis. During the twentieth century, many synthetic products have replaced their natural counterparts, also N
