tacit   ADJ. understood; not put into words. We have a tacit agreement based on only a handshake.
taciturn ADJ. habitually silent; talking little. The stereotypical cowboy is a taciturn soul, answering lengthy questions with a "Yep" or "Nope."
tactile ADJ. pertaining to the organs or sense of touch. His callused hands had lost their tactile sensitivity.
taint v. contaminate; cause to lose purity; modify with a trace of something bad. One speck of dirt on your utensils may contain enough germs to taint an entire batch of preserves, also N.
talisman   N. charm. She wore the talisman toward off evil.
talon N. claw of bird. The falconer wore a leather gauntlet to avoid being clawed by the hawk's talons.
tangential   ADJ.  peripheral; only slightly connected; digressing. Despite Clark's attempts to distract her with tangential remarks, Lois kept on coming back to her main question: Why couldn't he come out to dinner with Superman and her?
tangible ADJ. able to be touched; real; palpable. Although Tom did not own a house, he had several tangible assets—a car, a television, a PC—that he could sell if he needed cash.
tanner N. person who turns animal hides into leather. Using a solution of tanbark, the tanner treated the cowhide, transforming it into supple leather.
tantalize v. tease; torture with disappointment. Tom loved to tantalize his younger brother with candy; he knew the boy was forbidden to have it.
tantamount ADJ. equivalent in effect or value. Because so few Southern blacks could afford to pay the poll tax, the imposition of this tax on prospective voters was tantamount to disenfranchisement for black voters.
tantrum N. fit of petulance; caprice. The child learned that he could have almost anything if he went into tantrums.
taper   N. candle. She lit the taper on the windowsill.
tarantula N. venomous spider. We need an antitoxin to counteract the bite of the tarantula.
tarry v. delay; dawdle. We can't tarry if we want to get to the airport on time.
taut ADJ. tight; ready. The captain maintained that he ran a taut ship.
tautological ADJ. needlessly repetitious. In the sentence "It was visible to the eye," the phrase "to the eye" is tautological, tautology, N.
tawdry ADJ. cheap and gaudy. He won a few tawdry trinkets at Coney Island.
taxonomist N. specialist in classifying (animals, etc.). Dental patterns often enable the taxonomist to distinguish members of one rodent species from those of another.
tedium N. boredom; weariness. We hope this radio will help overcome the tedium of your stay in the hospital, tedious, ADJ.
teetotalism N. practice of abstaining totally from alcoholic drinks. Though the doctor warned Bert to cut down his booze intake, she didn't insist that he practice teetotalism. teetotaler, N.
temerity N. boldness; rashness. Do you have the temerity to argue with me?
temper v. moderate; tone down or restrain; toughen (steel). Not even her supervisor's grumpiness could temper Nancy's enthusiasm for her new job.
temperament N. characteristic frame of mind; disposition; emotional excess. Although the twins look alike, they differ markedly in temperament: Tod is calm, but Rod is excitable.
temperate ADJ. restrained; self-controlled; moderate in respect to temperature. Try to be temperate in your eating this holiday season; if you control your appetite, you won't gain too much weight. Goldilocks found San Francisco's temperate climate neither too hot nor too cold but just right.
tempestuous ADJ. stormy; impassioned; violent. Racket-throwing tennis star John McEnroe was famed for his displays of tempestuous temperament.
tempo N. speed of music. I find the conductor's tempo too slow for such a brilliant piece of music.
temporal ADJ. not lasting forever; limited by time; secular. At one time in our history, temporal rulers assumed that they had been given their thrones by divine right.
temporize v. avoid committing oneself; gain time. I cannot permit you to temporize any longer; I must have a definite answer today.
tenacious ADJ. holding fast. I had to struggle to break his tenacious hold on my arm.
tenacity N. firmness; persistence. Jean Val jean could not believe the tenacity of Inspector Javert. Here all Val jean had done was to steal a loaf of bread, and the inspector had pursued him doggedly for 20 years!
tendentious ADJ. having an aim; biased; designed to further a cause. The editorials in this periodical are tendentious rather than truth-seeking.
tender v. offer; extend. Although no formal charges had been made against him, in the wake of the recent scandal the mayor felt he should fender his resignation.
tenet N. doctrine; dogma. The agnostic did not accept the tenets of their faith.
tensile ADJ. capable of being stretched. Mountain climbers must know the tensile strength of their ropes.
tentative ADJ. hesitant; not fully worked out or developed; experimental; not definite or positive. Unsure of his welcome at the Christmas party, Scrooge took a tentative step into his nephew's drawing room.
tenuous ADJ. thin; rare; slim. The allegiance of our allies is held by rather tenuous ties; let us hope they will remain loyal.
tenure N. holding of an office; time during which such an office is held. She has permanent tenure in this position and cannot be fired.
tepid ADJ. lukewarm. During the summer, I like to take a tepid bath, not a hot one.
termination N. end. Though the time for termination of the project was near, we still had a lot of work to finish before we shut up shop, terminate, v.
terminology N. terms used in a science or art. The special terminology developed by some authorities in the field has done more to confuse laypersons than to enlighten them.
terminus N. last stop of railroad. After we reached the railroad terminus, we continued our journey into the wilderness on saddle horses.
terrestrial ADJ. on or relating to the earth. We have been able to explore the terrestrial regions much more thoroughly than the aquatic or celestial regions.
terse ADJ. concise; abrupt; pithy. There is a fine line between speech that is terse and to the point and speech that is too abrupt.
tertiary ADJ. third. He is so thorough that he analyzes tertiary causes where other writers are content with primary and secondary reasons.
tessellated ADJ. inlaid; mosaic. I recall seeing a table with a tessellated top of bits of stone and glass in a very interesting pattern.
testator N. maker of a will. The attorney called in his secretary and his partner to witness the signature of the testator.
testy ADJ. irritable; short-tempered. My advice is to avoid discussing this problem with her today as she is rather testy and may shout at you. testiness, N.
tether v. tie with a rope. Before we went to sleep, we tether the horses to prevent their wandering off during the night.
thematic ADJ. relating to a unifying motif or idea. Those who think of Moby Dick as a simple adventure story about whaling miss its underlying thematic import.
theocracy N. government run by religious leaders. Though some Pilgrims aboard the Mayflower favored the establishment of a theocracy in New England, many of their fellow voyagers preferred a nonreligious form of government.
theoretical ADJ. not practical or applied; hypothetical. Bob was better at applied engineering and computer programming than he was at theoretical physics and math. While I can still think of some theoretical objections to your plan, you've convinced me of its basic soundness.
therapeutic ADJ. curative. Now better known for its racetrack, Saratoga Springs first gained attention for the therapeutic qualities of its famous "healing waters."
thermal ADJ. pertaining to heat. The natives discovered that the hot springs gave excellent thermal baths and began to develop their community as a health resort. also N.
thespian ADJ. pertaining to drama. Her success in the school play convinced her she was destined for a thespian career, also N.
thrall N. slave; bondage. The captured soldier was held in thrall by the conquering army.
threadbare ADJ. worn through till the threads show; shabby and poor. The poorly paid adjunct professor hid the threadbare spots on his jacket by sewing leather patches on his sleeves.
thrifty ADJ. careful about money; economical. A thrifty shopper compares prices before making major purchases.
thrive v. prosper; flourish. Despite the impact of the recession on the restaurant trade, Philip's cafe thrived.
throes N. violent anguish. The throes of despair can be as devastating as the spasms accompanying physical pain.
throng N. crowd. Throngs of shoppers jammed the aisles, also v.
throttle v. strangle. The criminal tried to throttle the old man with his bare hands.
thwart v. baffle; frustrate. He felt that everyone was trying to thwart his plans and prevent his success.
tightwad N. excessively frugal person; miser. Jill called Jack a tightwad because he never picked up the check.
tiller N. handle used to move boat's rudder (to steer). Fearing the wind might shift suddenly and capsize the skiff, Tom kept one hand on the tiller at all times.
timbre N. quality of a musical tone produced by a musical instrument. We identify the instrument producing a musical sound by its timbre.
timidity N. lack of self-confidence or courage. If you are to succeed as a salesperson, you must first lose your timidity and fear of failure.
timorous ADJ. fearful; demonstrating fear. Her timorous manner betrayed the anxiety she felt at the moment.
tipple v. drink (alcoholic beverages) frequently. He found that his most enjoyable evenings occurred when he tippled with his friends at the local pub. N.
tirade N. extended scolding; denunciation; harangue. Every time the boss holds a meeting, he goes into a lengthy tirade, scolding us for everything from tardiness to padding our expenses.
titanic ADJ. gigantic. Titanic waves beat against the majestic S.S. Titanic, driving it against the concealed iceberg, titan, N.
tithe N. tax of one-tenth. Because he was an agnostic, he refused to pay his tithes to the clergy, also v.
titillate v. tickle. I am here not to titillate my audience but to enlighten it.
title    N. right or claim to possession; mark of rank; name (of a book, film, etc.). Though the penniless Duke of Ragwort no longer held title to the family estate, he still retained his title as head of one of England's oldest families.
titter   N. nervous laugh. Her aunt's constant titter nearly drove her mad. also v.
titular ADJ. having the title of an office without the obligations. Although he was the titular head of the company, the real decisions were made by his general manager.
toady N. servile flatterer; yes man. Never tell the boss anything he doesn't wish to hear: he doesn't want an independent adviser, he just wants a toady, also v.
toga   N. Roman outer robe. Marc Antony pointed to the slashes in Caesar's toga.
tome   N.  large volume. She spent much time in the libraries poring over ancient tomes.
tonsure N. shaving of the head, especially by person entering religious orders. His tonsure, even more than his monastic garb, indicated that he was a member of the religious order.
topography N. physical features of a region. Before the generals gave the order to attack, they ordered a complete study of the topography of the region.
torpor N. lethargy; sluggishness; dormancy. Throughout the winter, nothing aroused the bear from his torpor, he would not emerge from hibernation until spring, torpid, ADJ.
torque N. twisting force; force producing rotation. With her wrench she applied sufficient torque to the nut to loosen it.
torrent N. rushing stream; flood. Day after day of heavy rain saturated the hillside until the water ran downhill in torrents, torrential, ADJ.
torrid ADJ. passionate; hot or scorching. The novels published by Harlequin Romances feature torrid love affairs, some set in torrid climates.
torso N. trunk of statue with head and limbs missing; human trunk. This torso, found in the ruins of Pompeii, is now on exhibition in the museum in Naples.
tortuous   ADJ. winding; full of curves. Because this road is so tortuous, it is unwise to go faster than twenty miles an hour on it.
totter v. move unsteadily; sway, as if about to fall. On unsteady feet, the drunk tottered down the hill to the nearest bar.
touchstone N. stone used to test the fineness of gold alloys; criterion. What touchstone can be used to measure the character of a person?
touchy ADJ. sensitive; irascible. Do not discuss his acne with Archy; he is very touchy about it.
tout v. publicize; praise excessively. I lost confidence in my broker after he touted some junk bonds that turned out to be a bad investment.
toxic ADJ. poisonous. We must seek an antidote for whatever toxic substance he has eaten, toxicity, N.
tract N. pamphlet; a region of indefinite size. The King granted William Penn a tract of land in the New World.
tractable    ADJ.   docile;   easily   managed.   Although Susan seemed a tractable young woman, she had a stubborn streak of independence that occasionally led her to defy the powers-that-be when she felt they were in the wrong, tractability, N.
traduce v. expose to slander. His opponents tried to traduce the candidate's reputation by spreading rumors about his past.
trajectory N. path taken by a projectile. The police tried to locate the spot from which the assassin had fired the fatal shot by tracing the trajectory of the bullet.
tranquility N. calmness; peace. After the commotion and excitement of the city, I appreciate the tranquility of these fields and forests.
transcendent ADJ. surpassing; exceeding ordinary limits; superior. Standing on the hillside watching the sunset through the Golden Gate was a transcendent experience for Lise: the sight was so beautiful it surpassed her wildest dreams, transcend, v. transcendency, N.
transcribe v. copy. When you transcribe your notes, please send a copy to Mr. Smith and keep the original for our files, transcription, N.
transgression N. violation of a law; sin. Forgive us our transgressions; we know not what we do.
transient ADJ. momentary; temporary; staying for a short time. Levy’s joy at finding the perfect Christmas gift for Phil was transient; she still had to find presents for the cousins and Uncle Bob. Located near the airport, this hotel caters to the largely transient trade, also N.
transition N. going from one state of action to another. During the period of transition from oil heat to gas heat, the furnace will have to be shut off.
transitory ADJ. impermanent; fleeting. Fame is transitory. today's rising star is all too soon tomorrow's washed-up has-been, transistorizes, N.
translucent ADJ. partly transparent. We could not recognize the people in the next room because of the translucent curtains that separated us.
transmute v. change; convert to something different. He was unable to transmute his dreams into actualities.
transparent ADJ. easily detected; permitting light to pass through freely. John's pride in his son is transparent, no one who sees the two of them together can miss it. transparency, N.
transpire v. be revealed; happen. When Austen writes the sentence "It had just transpired that he had left gaming debts behind him," her meaning is not that the debts had just been incurred, but that the shocking news had just leaked out.
transport N. strong emotion. Margo was a creature of extremes, at one moment in transports of joy over a vivid sunset, at another moment in transports of grief over a dying bird, also v.
trappings N. outward decorations; ornaments. He loved the trappings of success: the limousines, the stock options, the company jet.
traumatic ADJ. pertaining to an injury caused by violence. In his nightmares, he kept on recalling the traumatic experience of being wounded in battle, trauma, N.
travail N. painful labor. How long do you think a man can endure such travail and degradation without rebelling?
traverse v. go through or across. When you traverse this field, be careful of the bull.
travesty N. comical parody; treatment aimed at making something appear ridiculous. The ridiculous decision the jury has arrived at is a travesty of justice.
treatise N. article treating a subject systematically and thoroughly. He is preparing a treatise on the Elizabethan playwrights for his graduate degree.
trek N. travel; journey. The tribe made their trek further north that summer in search of game, also v.
tremor N. trembling; slight quiver. She had a nervous tremor in her right hand.
tremulous ADJ. trembling; wavering. She was tremulous more from excitement than from fear.
trenchant ADJ. cutting; keen. I am afraid of his trenchant wit for it is so often sarcastic.
trepidation N. fear; nervous apprehension. As she entered the office of the dean of admissions, Sharon felt some trepidation about how she would do in her interview.
tribulation N. distress; suffering. After all the trials and tribulations we have gone through, we need this rest.
tribunal N. court of justice. The decision of the tribunal was final and the prisoner was sentenced to death.
tribute N. tax levied by a ruler; mark of respect. The colonists refused to pay tribute to a foreign despot.
trident N. three-pronged spear. Neptune is usually depicted as rising from the sea, carrying his trident on his shoulder.
trifling ADJ. trivial; unimportant. Why bother going to see a doctor for such a trifling, everyday cold? trifle, N.
trigger v. set off. John is touchy today; say one word wrong and you'll trigger an explosion.
trilogy N. group of three works. Remain Holland's novel Jean Christophe was first published as a trilogy,
trinket N. knickknack; bauble. Whenever she traveled abroad, Ethel would pick up costume jewelry and other trinkets as souvenirs.
trite ADJ. hackneyed; commonplace. The trite and predictable situations in many television programs turn off many viewers, who, in turn, turn off their sets.
trivia N. trifles; unimportant matters. Too many magazines ignore newsworthy subjects and feature trivia.
troth N. pledge of good faith especially in betrothal. He gave her his troth and vowed to cherish her always.
trough N. container for feeding farm animals; lowest point (of a wave, business cycle, etc.). The hungry pigs struggled to get at the fresh swill in the trough. The surfer rode her board, coasting along in the trough between two waves.
truculence N. aggressiveness; ferocity. Tynan's reviews were noted for their caustic attacks and general tone of truculence. truculent, ADJ.
truism N. self-evident truth. Many a truism is summed up in a proverb; for example, "Marry in haste, repent at leisure."
truncate v. cut the top off. The top of the cone that has been truncated in a plane parallel to its base is a circle.
tryst N. meeting. The lovers kept their tryst even though they realized their danger, also v.
tumid ADJ. swollen; pompous; bombastic. I especially dislike his tumid style; I prefer writing that is less swollen and bombastic.
tumult N. commotion; riot; noise. She could not make herself heard over the tumult of the mob.
tundra N. rolling, treeless plain in Siberia and arctic North America. Despite the cold, many geologists are trying to discover valuable mineral deposits in the tundra.
turbid ADJ. muddy; having the sediment disturbed. The water was turbid after the children had waded through it.
turbulence N. state of violent agitation. Warned of approaching turbulence in the atmosphere, the pilot told the passengers to fasten their seat belts.
tureen N. deep dish for serving soup. The waiters brought the soup to the tables in silver tureens.
turgid ADJ. swollen; distended. The turgid river threatened to overflow the levees and flood the countryside.
turmoil N. great commotion and confusion. Lydia running off with a soldier! Mother fainting at the news! The Bennet household was in turmoil.
turncoat N. traitor. The British considered Benedict Arnold a loyalist; the Americans considered him a turncoat.
turpitude N. depravity. A visitor may be denied admittance to this country if she has been guilty of moral turpitude.
tutelage N. guardianship; training. Under the tutelage of such masters of the instrument, she made rapid progress as a virtuoso.
tutelary ADJ. protective; pertaining to a guardianship. I am acting in my tutelary capacity when I refuse to grant you permission to leave the campus.
tycoon N. wealthy leader. John D. Rockefeller was a prominent tycoon.
typhoon N. tropical hurricane or cyclone. If you liked Twister, you'll love Typhoon]
tyranny N. oppression; cruel government. Frederick Douglass fought against the tyranny of slavery throughout his entire life.
tyro N. beginner; novice. For a mere tyro, you have produced some marvelous results.
