ubiquitous ADJ. being everywhere; omnipresent. That Christmas "The Little Drummer Boy" seemed ubiquitous: Justin heard the tune everywhere he went, ubiquity, N.
ulterior ADJ. situated beyond; unstated and often questionable. You must have an ulterior motive for your behavior, since there is no obvious reason for it.
ultimate ADJ. final; not susceptible to further analysis. Scientists are searching for the ultimate truths.
ultimatum N. last demand; warning. Since they have ignored our ultimatum, our only recourse is to declare war.
umbrage N. resentment; anger; sense of injury or insult. She took umbrage at his remarks and stormed away in a huff.
unaccountable ADJ. inexplicable; unreasonable or mysterious. I have taken an unaccountable dislike to my doctor.
unanimity N. complete agreement. We were surprised by the unanimity with which our proposals were accepted by the different groups, unanimous, ADJ.
unassailable ADJ. not subject to question; not open to attack. Penelope's virtue was unassailable', while she waited for her husband to come back from the war, no other guy had a chance.
unassuaged ADJ. unsatisfied; not soothed. Her anger is unassuaged by your apology.
unassuming ADJ. modest. He is so unassuming that some people fail to realize how great a man he really is.
unbridled ADJ. violent. She had a sudden fit of unbridled rage.
uncanny ADJ. strange; mysterious. You have the uncanny knack of reading my innermost thoughts.
unconscionable ADJ. unscrupulous; excessive. She found the loan shark's demands unconscionable and impossible to meet.
uncouth ADJ. outlandish; clumsy; boorish. Most biographers portray Lincoln as an uncouth and ungainly young man.
unction N. the act of anointing with oil. The anointing with oil of a person near death is called extreme unction.
unctuous ADJ. oily; bland; insincerely suave. Uriah Heap disguised his nefarious actions by unctuous protestations of his '"utility."
underlying ADJ. fundamental; lying below. The underlying cause of the student riot was not the strict curfew rule but the moldy cafeteria food. Miss Marple seems a sweet little old lady at first, but an iron will underlies that soft and fluffy facade.
undermine v. weaken; sap. The recent corruption scandals have undermined many people's faith in the city government.
underscore v. emphasize. Addressing the jogging class, Kim underscored the importance to runners of good nutrition.
undulating ADJ. moving with a wavelike motion. The Hilo Hula Festival featured an undulating sea of grass skirts.
unearth v. dig up. When they unearthed the city, the archeologists found many relics of an ancient civilization.
unearthly ADJ. not earthly; weird. There is an unearthly atmosphere in her work that amazes the casual observer.
unequivocal ADJ. plain; obvious. My answer to your proposal is an unequivocal and absolute "No."
unerringly ADV. infallibly. My teacher unerringly pounced on the one typographical error in my essay.
unexceptionable ADJ. not offering any basis for criticism; entirely acceptable. Objecting to Jack's lack of a respectable family background, Lady Bracknell declared lineage and character.
unfaltering ADJ. steadfast. She approached the guillotine with unfaltering steps.
unfeigned ADJ. genuine; real. She turned so pale that I am sure her surprise was unfeigned.
unfettered ADJ. liberated; freed from chains. Chained to the wall for months on end, the hostage despaired that he would ever be unfettered, unfetter, v.
unfledged ADJ. immature. It is hard for an unfledged writer to find a sympathetic publisher.
unfrock v. to strip a priest or minister of church authority. To disbar a lawyer, to unfrock a priest, to suspend a doctor's license to practice — these are extreme steps that the authorities should take only after careful consideration.
ungainly ADJ. awkward; clumsy; unwieldy. "If you want to know whether Nick's an ungainly dancer, check out my bruised feet," said Nora. Anyone who has ever tried to carry a bass fiddle knows it's an ungainly instrument.
unguent N. ointment. Apply this unguent to the sore muscles before retiring.
uniformity N. sameness; monotony. At Persons magazine, we strive for uniformity of style; as a result, all our writers wind up sounding exactly alike, uniform, ADJ.
unilateral ADJ. one-sided. This legislation is unilateral since it binds only one party in the controversy.
unimpeachable ADJ. blameless and exemplary. Her conduct in office was unimpeachable and her record is spotless.
uninhibited ADJ. unrepressed. The congregation was shocked by her uninhibited laughter during the sermon.
unintimidating ADJ. unfrightening. Though Phil had expected to feel overawed when he met Joe Montana, he found the world-famous quarterback friendly and unintimidating.
unique ADJ. without an equal; single in kind. You have the unique distinction of being the first student whom I have had to fail in this course.
unison N. unity of pitch; complete accord. The choir sang in unison.
universal ADJ. characterizing or affecting all; present everywhere. At first, no one shared Christopher's opinions; his theory that the world was round was met with universal disdain.
unkempt ADJ. disheveled; uncared for in appearance. Jeremy hated his neighbor's unkempt lawn: he thought its neglected appearance had a detrimental effect on neighborhood property values.
unmitigated ADJ. unrelieved or immoderate; absolute. After four days of unmitigated heat, I was ready to collapse from heat prostration. The congresswoman's husband was an unmitigated jerk: not only did he abandon her, but also he took her campaign funds!
unobtrusive ADJ. inconspicuous; not blatant. Reluctant to attract notice, the governess took a chair in a far corner of the room and tried to be as unobtrusive as possible.
unprecedented ADJ. novel; unparalleled. Margaret Mitchell's book Gone with the Wind was an unprecedented success.
unprepossessing ADJ. unattractive. During adolescence many attractive young people somehow acquire the false notion that their appearance is unprepossessing.
unravel v. disentangle; solve. With equal ease Miss Marple unraveled tangled balls of yarn and baffling murder mysteries.
unrequited ADJ. not reciprocated. Suffering the pangs of unrequited love, Olivia rebukes Cesario for his hardheartedness.
unruly ADJ. disobedient; lawless. The only way to curb this unruly mob is to use tear gas.
unsavory ADJ. distasteful; morally offensive. People with unsavory reputations should not be allowed to work with young children.
unscathed ADJ. unharmed. They prayed he would come back from the war unscathed.
unseemly ADJ. unbecoming; indecent; in poor taste. When Seymour put whoopee cushions on all the seats in the funeral parlor, his conduct was most unseemly.
unsightly ADJ. ugly. Although James was an experienced emergency room nurse, he occasionally became queasy when faced with a particularly unsightly injury.
unsullied ADJ. untarnished. I am happy that my reputation is unsullied.
untenable ADJ. indefensible; not able to be maintained. Wayne is so contrary that, the more untenable a position is, the harder he'll try to defend it.
untoward ADJ. unfortunate or unlucky; adverse; unexpected. Trying to sneak out of the house, Huck had a most untoward encounter with Miss Watson, who thwarted his escape.
unwarranted ADJ. unjustified; groundless; undeserved. We could not understand Martin's unwarranted rudeness to his mother's guests.
unwieldy ADJ. awkward; cumbersome; unmanageable. The large carton was so unwieldy that the movers had trouble getting it up the stairs.
unwitting ADJ. unintentional; not knowing. She was the unwitting tool of the swindlers.
unwonted ADJ. unaccustomed. He hesitated to assume the unwonted role of master of ceremonies at the dinner.
upbraid v. severely scold; reprimand. Not only did Miss Minchin upbraid Ermengarde for her disobedience, but also she hung her up by her braids from a coatrack in the classroom.
uproarious ADJ. marked by commotion; extremely funny; very noisy. The uproarious comedy hit Ace Ventura: Pet Detective starred Jim Carrey, whose comic mugging provoked gales of uproarious laughter from audiences coast to coast.
upshot N. outcome. The upshot of the rematch was that the former champion proved that he still possessed all the skills of his youth.
urbane ADJ. suave; refined; elegant. The courtier was urbane and sophisticated, urbanity, N.
urchin N. mischievous child (usually a boy). Get out! This store is no place for grubby urchins!
ursine ADJ. bearlike; pertaining to a bear. Because of its ursine appearance, the great panda has been identified with the bears; actually, it is closely related to the raccoon.
usurp v. seize another's power or rank. The revolution ended when the victorious rebel general succeeded in his attempt to usurp the throne, usurpation, N.
usury N. lending money at illegal rates of interest. The loan shark was found guilty of usury.
Utopia N. ideal place, state, or society. Fed up with this imperfect universe, Don would have liked to run off to Shangrila or some other imaginary Utopia. Utopian, ADJ.
uxorious ADJ. excessively devoted to one's wife. His friends laughed at him because he was so uxorious and submissive to his wife's desires.
