vacuous ADJ. empty; lacking in ideas; stupid. The candidate's vacuous remarks annoyed the audience, who had hoped to hear more than empty platitudes, vacuity, N.
vagabond N. wanderer; tramp. In summer, college students wander the roads of Europe like carefree vagabonds, also ADJ.
vagary   N. caprice; whim. She followed every vagary of fashion.
vagrant ADJ. stray; random. He tried to study, but could not collect his vagrant thoughts.
vagrant N. homeless wanderer. Because he was a stranger in town with no visible means of support, Martin feared he would be jailed as a vagrant, vagrancy, N.
vainglorious ADJ. boastful; excessively conceited. She was a vainglorious and arrogant individual.
valedictory ADJ. pertaining to farewell. I found the valedictory address too long; leave-taking should be brief, also N.
valid ADJ. logically convincing; sound; legally acceptable. You're going to have to come up with a better argument if you want to convince me that your reasoning is valid.
validate v. confirm; ratify. I will not publish my findings until I validate my results.
valor N. bravery. He received the Medal of Honor for his valor In battle.
vampire N. ghostly being that sucks the blood of the living. Children were afraid to go to sleep at night because of the many legends of vampires.
vanguard N. forerunners; advance forces. We are the vanguard of a tremendous army that is following us.
vantage N. position giving an advantage. They fired upon the enemy from behind trees, walls and any other point of vantage they could find.
vapid ADJ. dull and unimaginative; insipid and flavorless. "Boring!" said Cher, as she suffered through yet another vapid lecture about Dead White Male Poets.
vaporize v. turn into vapor (steam, gas, fog, etc.). "Zap!" went Super Mario's atomic ray gun as he vaporized another deadly foe. .
variegated ADJ. many-colored. Without her glasses, Gretchen saw the fields of tulips as a variegated blur.
vassal N. in feudalism, one who held land of a superior lord. The lord demanded that his vassals contribute more to his military campaign.
vaunted ADJ. boasted; bragged; highly publicized. This much vaunted project proved a disappointment when it collapsed.
veer v. change in direction. After what seemed an eternity, the wind veered to the east and the storm abated.
vegetate v. live in a monotonous way. I do not understand how you can vegetate in this quiet village after the adventurous life you have led.
vehement ADJ. forceful; intensely emotional; with marked vigor. Alfred became so vehement in describing what was wrong with the Internal Revenue Service that he began jumping up and down and gesticulating wildly, vehemence, N.
velocity N. speed. The train went by at considerable velocity.
venal ADJ. capable of being bribed. The venal policeman accepted the bribe offered him by the speeding motorist whom he had stopped.
vendetta   N. blood feud. The rival mobs engaged in a bitter vendetta.
vendor   N. seller. The fruit vendor sold her wares from a stall on the sidewalk.
veneer N. thin layer; cover. Casual acquaintances were deceived by his veneer of sophistication and failed to recognize his fundamental shallowness.
venerable ADJ. deserving high respect. We do not mean to be disrespectful when we refuse to follow the advice of our venerable leader.
venerate   v. revere. In Tibet today, the common people still venerate their traditional spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama.
venial ADJ. forgivable; trivial. When Jean Valjean stole a loaf of bread to feed his starving sister, he committed a venial offense.
venison N. the meat of a deer. The hunters dined on venison.
venom N. poison; hatred. Bitten on his ankle by a venomous snake, the cowboy contortionist curled up like a pretzel and sucked the venom out of the wound.
vent N. small opening; outlet. The wine did not flow because the air vent in the barrel was clogged.
vent   v. express; utter. He vented his wrath on his class.
ventral v. abdominal. We shall now examine the ventral plates of this serpent, not the dorsal side.
ventriloquist N. someone who can make his or her voice seem to come from another person or thing. This ventriloquist does an act in which she has a conversation with a wooden dummy.
venture v. risk; dare; undertake a risk. Fearing to distress the actors, the timorous reviewer never ventured to criticize a performance in harsh terms, also N.
venturesome ADJ. bold. A group of venturesome women were the first to scale Mt. Annapurna.
venue N. location. The attorney asked for a change of venue; he thought his client would do better if the trial were held in a less conservative county.
veracious   ADJ. truthful. I can recommend him for this position because I have always found him veracious and reliable, veracity, N.
veracity N. truthfulness. Trying to prove Hill a liar, Senator Spector repeatedly questioned her veracity. veracious, ADJ.
verbalize v. put into words. I know you don't like to talk about these things, but please try to verbalize your feelings.
verbatim ADV. word for word. He repeated the message verbatim, also ADJ.
verbiage N. pompous array of words. After we had waded through all the verbiage, we discovered that the writer had said very little.
verbose   ADJ. wordy. We had to make some major cuts in Senator Foghorn's speech because it was far too verbose, verbosity, N.
verdant ADJ. green; lush in vegetation. Monet's paintings of the verdant meadows were symphonies in green.
verdigris N. green coating on copper that has been exposed to the weather. Despite all attempts to protect the statue from the elements, it became coated with verdigris.
verge N. border; edge. Madame Curie knew she was on the verge of discovering the secrets of radioactive elements, also v.
verisimilar ADJ. probable or likely; having the appearance of truth. Something verisimilar is very similar to the truth, or at least seems to be.
verisimilitude N. appearance of truth; likelihood. Critics praised her for the verisimilitude of her performance as Lady Macbeth. She was completely believable.
veritable ADJ. actual; being truly so; not false or imaginary. At his computer, Pavel is a veritable wizard, creating graphic effects that seem magical to programmers less skilled than he.
verity N. quality of being true; lasting truth or principle. Do you question the verity of Kato Kaelin's testimony about what he heard the night Nicole Brown Simpson was slain? To the skeptic, everything was relative: there were no eternal verities in which one could believe.
vernacular N. living language; natural style. Cut out those old-fashioned "thee's" and "thou's" and write in the vernacular, also ADJ.
vernal ADJ. pertaining to spring. We may expect vernal showers all during the month of April.
versatile ADJ. having many talents; capable of working in many fields. She was a versatile athlete, earning varsity letters in basketball, hockey, and track, versatility, N.
vertex N. summit. Let us drop a perpendicular line from the vertex of the triangle to the base, vertices, PL.
vertigo N. severe dizziness. When you test potential plane pilots for susceptibility to spells of vertigo, be sure to hand out airsick bags.
verve N. enthusiasm; liveliness. She approached her studies with such verve that it was impossible for her to do poorly.
vestige N. trace; remains. We discovered vestiges of early Indian life in the cave.
vex N. annoy; distress. Please try not to vex your mother; she is doing the best she can.
viable ADJ. practical or workable; capable of maintaining life. The plan to build a new baseball stadium, though missing a few details, is viable and stands a good chance of winning popular support.
viand    N. food. There was a variety of viands at the feast.
vicarious ADJ. acting as a substitute; done by a deputy. Many people get a vicarious thrill at the movies by imagining they are the characters on the screen.
vicissitude N. change of fortune. Humbled by life's vicissitudes, the last emperor of China worked as a lowly gardener in the palace over which he had once ruled.
victuals N. food. I am very happy to be able to provide you with these victuals; I know you are hungry.
vie v. contend; compete. Politicians vie with one another, competing for donations and votes.
vigilant ADJ. watchfully awake; alert to spot danger. From the battlement, the vigilant sentry kept his eyes open for any sign of enemy troops approaching, vigilance, N.
vigor N. active strength. Although he was over seventy years old, Jack had the vigor of a man in his prime, vigorous, ADJ.
vignette N. picture; short literary sketch. The New Yorker published her latest vignette.
vilify v. slander. Waging a highly negative campaign, the candidate attempted to vilify his opponent's reputation, vilification, N.
vindicate v. clear from blame; exonerate; justify or support. The lawyer's goal was to vindicate her client and prove him innocent on all charges. The critics' extremely favorable reviews vindicate my opinion that The Madness of King George is a brilliant movie.
vindictive ADJ. out for revenge; malicious. Divorce sometimes brings out a vindictive streak in people; when Tony told Tina he was getting a divorce, she poured green Jell-0 into his aquarium and turned his tropical fish into dessert.
vintner N. winemaker; seller of wine. The poet wondered what the vintners could buy that would be half as precious as the wine they sold.
viper N. poisonous snake. The habitat of the horned viper, a particularly venomous snake, is in sandy regions like the Sahara or the Sinai peninsula.
virile ADJ. manly. I do not accept the premise that a man is virile only when he is belligerent.
virtual ADJ. in essence; for practical purposes. She is a virtual financial wizard when it comes to money matters.
virtue N. goodness; moral excellence; good quality. A virtue carried to extremes can turn into something resembling vice; humility, for example, can degenerate into servility and spinelessness.
virtuoso N. highly skilled artist. The child prodigy Yehudi Menuhin grew into a virtuoso whose virtuosity on the violin thrilled millions, virtuosity, N.
virulent ADJ. extremely poisonous; hostile; bitter. Laid up with a virulent case of measles, Vera blamed her doctors because her recovery took so long. In fact, she became quite virulent on the subject of the quality of modern medical care, virulence, N.
virus N. disease communicator. The doctors are looking for a specific medicine to control this virus.
visage N. face; appearance. The stern visage of the judge indicated that she had decided to impose a severe penalty.
visceral ADJ. felt in one's inner organs. She disliked the visceral sensations she had whenever she rode the roller coaster.
viscid ADJ. adhesive; gluey. The trunk of the maple tree was viscid with sap.
viscous   ADJ. sticky, gluey. Melted tar is a viscous substance, viscosity, N.
vise N. tool for holding work in place. Before filing its edges, the keysmith took the blank key and fixed it firmly between the jaws of a vise.
visionary ADJ. produced by imagination; fanciful; mystical. She was given to visionary schemes that never materialized, also N.
vital ADJ. vibrant and lively; critical; living; breathing. The vital, highly energetic first aid instructor stressed that it was vital in examining accident victims to note their vital signs.
vitiate v. spoil the effect of; make inoperative. Fraud will vitiate the contract.
vitreous ADJ. pertaining to or resembling glass. Although this plastic has many vitreous qualities such as transparency, it is unbreakable.
vitriolic ADJ. corrosive; sarcastic. Such vitriolic criticism is uncalled for.
vituperative   ADJ. abusive; scolding. He became more vituperative as he realized that we were not going to grant him his wish.
vivacious ADJ. lively or animated; sprightly. She had always been vivacious and sparkling.
vivisection N. act of dissecting living animals. The Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals opposed vivisection and deplored the practice of using animals in scientific experiments.
vixen N. female fox; ill-tempered woman. Aware that she was right once again, he lost his temper and called her a shrew and a vixen.
vociferous ADJ. clamorous; noisy. The crowd grew vociferous in its anger and threatened to take the law into its own hands.
vogue N. popular fashion. Jeans became the vogue on many college campuses.
volatile ADJ. changeable; explosive; evaporating rapidly. The political climate today is extremely volatile: no one can predict what the electorate will do next. Maria Callas's temper was extremely volatile: the only thing you could predict was that she would blow up. Acetone is an extremely volatile liquid: it evaporates instantly, volatility, N.
volition N. act of making a conscious choice. She selected this dress of her own volition.
voluble ADJ. fluent; glib; talkative. An excessively voluble speaker suffers from logorrhea: he continually runs off at the mouth! volubility, N.
voluminous ADJ. bulky; large. A caftan is a voluminous garment; the average person wearing one looks as if he or she is draped in a small tent.
voracious ADJ. ravenous. The wolf is a voracious animal, its hunger never satisfied.
vortex N. whirlwind; whirlpool; center of turbulence; predicament into which one is inexorably plunged. Sucked into the vortex of the tornado, Dorothy and Toto were carried from Kansas to Oz.
vouchsafe v. grant condescendingly; guarantee. I can safely vouchsafe you fair return on your investment.
voyeur N. Peeping Tom. Jill called Jack a voyeur when she caught him aiming his binoculars at a bedroom window of the house next door.
vulnerable ADJ. susceptible to wounds. His opponents could not harm Achilles, who was vulnerable only in his heel, vulnerability, N.
vulpine ADJ. like a fox; crafty. She disliked his sly ways, but granted him a certain vulpine intelligence.
