waffle v. speak equivocally about an issue. When asked directly about the governor's involvement in the savings and loan scandal, the press secretary waffled, talking all around the issue.
waft v. moved gently by wind or waves. Daydreaming, he gazed at the leaves that wafted past his window.
waggish ADJ. mischievous; humorous; tricky. He was a prankster who, unfortunately, often overlooked the damage he could cause with his waggish tricks, wag, N.
waif N. homeless child or animal. Although he already had eight cats, he could not resist adopting yet another feline waif.
waive v. give up temporarily; yield. I will waive my rights in this matter in order to expedite our reaching a proper decision.
wake N. trail of ship or other object through water; path of something that has gone before. The wake of the swan gliding through the water glistened in the moonlight. Reporters and photographers converged on South Carolina in the wake of the hurricane that devastated much of the eastern seaboard.
wallow v. roll in; indulge in; become helpless. The hippopotamus loves to wallow in the mud.
wan ADJ. having a pale or sickly color; pallid. Suckling asked, "Why so pale and wan, fond lover?"
wanderlust N. strong longing to travel. Don't set your heart on a traveling man. He's got too much wanderlust to settle down.
wane v. decrease in size or strength; draw gradually to an end. To wane is the opposite of to wax or increase in size. When lit, does a wax candle wane?
wangle v. wiggle out; fake. She tried to wangle an invitation to the party.
wanton ADJ. unrestrained; willfully malicious; unchaste. Pointing to the stack of bills, Sheldon criticized Sarah for her wanton expenditures. In response, Sara accused Sheldon of making an unfounded, wanton attack.
warble v. sing; babble. Every morning the birds warbled outside her window, also N.
warranted   ADJ. justified; authorized. Before the judge issues the injunction, you must convince her this action is warranted.
warranty N. guarantee; assurance by seller. The purchaser of this automobile is protected by the manufacturer's warranty. They will replace any defective part for five years or 50,000 miles.
warren N. tunnels in which rabbits live; crowded conditions in which people live. The tenement was a veritable warren, packed with people too poor to live elsewhere.
wary   ADJ. very cautious. The spies grew wary as they approached the sentry.
wastrel N. profligate. He was denounced as a wastrel who had dissipated his inheritance.
wax v. increase; grow. With proper handling, her fortunes waxed and she became rich.
waylay v. ambush; lie in wait. They agreed to waylay their victim as he passed through the dark alley going home.
wean v. accustom a baby not to nurse; give up a cherished activity. He decided he would wean himself away from eating junk food and stick to fruits and vegetables.
weather v. endure the effects of weather or other forces. He weathered the changes in his personal life with difficulty, as he had no one in whom to confide.
welt N. mark from a beating or whipping. The evidence of child abuse was very clear; Jennifer's small body was covered with welts and bruises.
welter   N. turmoil; bewildering jumble. The existing welter of overlapping federal and state proclaims cries out for immediate reform.
welter v. wallow. At the height of the battle, the casualties were so numerous that the victims weltered in their blood while waiting for medical attention.
wheedle v. cajole; coax; deceive by flattery. She knows she can wheedle almost anything she wants from her father.
whelp N. young wolf, dog, tiger, etc. This collie whelp won't do for breeding, but he'd make a fine pet.
whet v. sharpen; stimulate. The odors from the kitchen are whetting my appetite; I will be ravenous by the time the meal is served.
whiff N. puff or gust (of air, scent, etc.); hint. The slightest whiff of Old Spice cologne brought memories of George to her mind.
whimsical N. capricious; fanciful. In Mrs. Doubtfire, the hero is a playful, whimsical man who takes a notion to dress up as a woman so that he can look after his children, who are in the custody of his ex-wife, whimsy, N.
whinny v. neigh like a horse. When he laughed through his nose, it sounded as if he whinnied.
whit N. smallest speck. There is not a whit of intelligence or understanding in your observations.
whittle v. pare; cut off bits. As a present for Aunt Polly, Tom whittled some clothespins out of a chunk of wood.
whorl N. ring of leaves around stem; ring. Identification by fingerprints is based on the difference in shape and number of the whorls on the fingers.
willful ADJ. intentional; headstrong. Donald had planned to kill his wife for months; clearly, her death was a case of deliberate, willful murder, not a crime of passion committed by a hasty, willful youth unable to foresee the consequences of his deeds.
wily ADJ. cunning; artful. She is as wily as a fox in avoiding trouble.
wince v. shrink back; flinch. The screech of the chalk on the blackboard made her wince.
windfall N. fallen fruit; unexpected lucky event. This huge tax refund is quite a windfall.
winnow v. sift; separate good parts from bad. This test will winnow out the students who study from those who don't bother.
winsome ADJ. agreeable; gracious; engaging. By her winsome manner, she made herself liked by everyone who met her.
wispy ADJ. thin; slight; barely discernible. Worried about preserving his few wispy tufts of hair, Walter carefully massaged his scalp and applied hair restorer every night.
wistful ADJ. vaguely longing; sadly pensive. With a last wistful glance at the happy couples dancing in the hall, Sue headed back to her room to study for her exam.
withdrawn ADJ. introverted; remote. Rebuffed by his colleagues, the initially outgoing young researcher became increasingly withdrawn.
wither v. shrivel; decay. Cut flowers are beautiful for a day, but all too soon they wither.
withhold v. refuse to give; hold back. The tenants decided to withhold a portion of the rent until the landlord kept his promise to renovate the building.
withstand v. stand up against; successfully resist. If you can withstand all the peer pressure in high school to cut classes and goof off, you should survive college in fine shape.
witless ADJ. foolish; idiotic. If Beavis is a half-wit, then Butthead is totally witless.
witticism N. witty saying; wisecrack. I don't mean any criticism, but your last supposed witticism really hurt my feelings.
wizardry N. sorcery; magic. Merlin amazed the knights with his wizardry.
wizened ADJ. withered; shriveled. The wizened old man in the home for the aged was still active and energetic.
woe N. deep, inconsolable grief; affliction; suffering. Pale and wan with grief, Wanda was bowed down beneath the burden of her woes.
wont N. custom; habitual procedure. As was her wont, she jogged two miles every morning before going to work.
worldly ADJ. engrossed in matters of this earth; not spiritual. You must leave your worldly goods behind you when you go to meet your Maker.
wrangle v. quarrel; obtain through arguing; herd cattle. They wrangled over their inheritance.
wrath N. anger; fury. She turned to him, full of wrath, and said, "What makes you think I'll accept lower pay for this job than you get?"
wreak v. inflict. I am afraid he will wreak his vengeance on the innocent as well as the guilty.
wrench v. pull; strain; twist. She wrenched free of her attacker and landed a powerful kick to his kneecap.
wrest v. pull away; take by violence. With only ten seconds left to play, our team wrested victory from their grasp.
writ N. written command issued by a court. The hero of Leonard's novel is a process server who invents unorthodox ways of serving writs on reluctant parties.
writhe v. twist in coils; contort in pain. In Dances with Snakes, the snake dancer wriggled sinuously as her boa constrictor writhed around her torso.
wry ADJ. twisted; with a humorous twist. We enjoy Dorothy Parker's verse for its wry wit.
